» HBR's latest thinking on
the future of business

|
Insights You Need from

Harvard
Business
Review


Insights You Need from

Harvard
Business

Review


Insights You Need from Harvard Business Review

Business is changing. Will you adapt or be left behind?

Get up to speed and deepen your understanding of the top-
ics that are shaping your company's future with the Insights You
Need from Harvard Business Review series. Featuring HBR's smartest
thinking on fast-moving issues—blockchain, cybersecurity,
AI, and more—each book provides the foundation introduc-
tion and practical case studies your organization needs to
compete today and collects the best research, interviews, and
analysis to get it ready for tomorrow.

You cant afford to ignore how these issues will transform
the landscape of business and society. The Insights You Need
series will help you grasp these critical ideas—and prepare
you and your company for the future.

Books in the series include:

Agile Global Recession
Artificial Intelligence Hybrid Workplace
Blockchain Monopolies and Tech Giants
Climate Change Multigenerational
Coronavirus: Leadership Workplace
and Recovery Racial Justice
Crypto | |

| Strategic Analytics
Customer Data and Privacy |
Cybersecurity PDT 20
ESG Web3
The Future of Work The Year in Tech, 2023

Generative Al The Year in Tech, 2024


Insights You Need from

Harvard
Business

Review

p Os.
; ae
ic
ba PP pe
" X dd .
a ry I
| as * at
i 3 Tt, ’ or
Y = 3k Aa?

Syddansk
Universitetsbibliotek

Harvard Business Review Press
Boston, Massachusetts


HBR Press Quantity Sales Discounts

Harvard Business Review Press titles are available at significant quantity
discounts when purchased in bulk for client gifts, sales promotions,
and premiums. Special editions, including books with corporate log-
os, customized covers, and letters from the company or CEO printed
in the front matter, as well as excerpts of existing books, can also be
created in large quantities for special needs.

For details and discount information for both print
and ebook formats, contact booksales@harvardbusiness.org,
tel. 800-988-0886, or www.hbr.org/bulksales.

Copyright 2024 Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation

All rights reserved
Printed and bound in Great Britain by TJ Books Limited, Padstow, Cornwall

10987654321

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), without the prior
permission of the publisher. Requests for permission should be directed

to permissions@harvardbusiness.org, or mailed to Permissions, Harvard
Business School Publishing, 60 Harvard Way, Boston, Massachusetts 02163.

The web addresses referenced in this book were live and correct at the
time of the book’s publication but may be subject to change.

Cataloging-in-Publication data is forthcoming.

ISBN: 978-1-64782-690-1
eISBN: 978-1-64782-691-8

The paper used in this publication meets the requirements of the
American National Standard for Permanence of Paper for Publications
and Documents in Libraries and Archives Z39.48-1992.


Contents

Debates, Metrics, and the Competitive Advantage of ESG
Defining what ESG is—and isnt.

by Mary Johnstone-Louis

Building an ESG Strategy

|. The Essential Link Between ESG Targets and
Financial Performance

Understand the contradictions—and synergies—
between profit and societal benefits.

by Mark R. Kramer and Marc W. Pfitzer

Does Your Company Need a Chief ESG Officer? 27

Three questions to ask before appointing one.

by Robert Langan and Markus Menz

2 The ESG Issues That Matter Most to People 35

Treatment of workers rises to the top.

by Daniel J. Benjamin, Ori Heffetz, and Michael M. Weinstein


Contents

Living into ESG

Private Equity Should Take the Lead in Sustainability A]

Where the industry is now, and where it still needs

to improve.

by Robert G. Eccles, Vinay Shandal, David Young, and
Benédicte Montgomery

Ensure That Your Joint Ventures Meet Your ESG Goals 69

Three levers to pull.

by James Bamford, Shishir Bhargava, Neetin Gulati, Tracy Pyle,
and Joshua Kwicinski

Al Is Testing the Limits of Corporate Governance 79

Lessons—and one warning—from OpenAl s
boardroom debacle.

by Roberto fallarita

What Is Responsible Computing? ye

Take an ethical approach to how, where, and
why you use IT.

by Rashik Parmar, Marc Peters, and Llewellyn D.W. Thomas

It's Time to Focus on the G in ESG 115

Too often, governance policies are in tension
with environmental and social ones.

by Leo E. Strine Jr., Justin L. Brooke, Kyle M. Diamond, and
Derrick L. Parker Jr.

vill


Contents

Managing Social Responsibility

How to Be Proactive—Not Reactive—on Social Issues 125

Take a stance, even at the expense of short-term profit.

by Lily Zheng

Tony’s Chocolonely and Its Purpose-Driven

(and Profitable) Supply Chain 135
A case study of the popular Dutch chocolate brand.

by Frans Pannekoek, Thomas Breugem, and
Luk N. Van Wassenhove

How Companies Can Partner with Nonprofits 147

Done well, these relationships can boost growth,
shareholder value, and societal impact.

by Bruce Simpson, Talia Varley, and Giulia Siccardo

(2. Why Business Leaders Must Resist
the Anti-ESG Movement 155

Some battles are worth fighting.

by Andrew Winston

About the Contributors 173
Index 181

IX


Introduction

DEBATES, METRICS,
AND THE COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGE OF ESG

by Mary Johnstone-Louis

ESG is dead. Long live ESG.
What should business leaders make of ESG, a term

that has received so much notice of late? Depending on

who you ask, ESG is a business essential, a passe term, a

danger, or a distraction.
Recently, the subject of ESG has garnered significant at-

tention from regulators, corporate leaders, investors, and

politicians. Regulators in Europe and the United States

as well as the global standard-setter for accounting and


Introduction

corporate disclosure have taken on the topic.! Legislation
related to ESG has been adopted in more than 20 U.S.
states, with some states in support and others in detrac-
tion. Throughout the European Union, boards of large
companies and listed small and medium enterprises are
already busily preparing for a first round of mandatory
ESG reporting that came into force for the 2024 financial
year. The percentage of companies with public targets on
environmental protection is growing precipitously, and
some studies suggest that chief sustainability officers par-
ticipate in investor meetings with increasing regularity.”

In short, the conversation about ESG is taking place at the
highest levels of leadership across the globe.

Several interconnected factors have led ESG to gain
unprecedented momentum. Heightened awareness of en-
vironmental challenges and social unrest, the rise of social
media and consumer “activism,” and increasing scrutiny
from investors, regulators, and other stakeholders have
converged to elevate ESG to a central theme. Investors are
recognizing the material impact ESG factors can have on
financial performance and risk. Boardrooms are review-
ing strategy and capital allocation with impending regu-
lation in mind and taking a fresh look at how ESG issues
may impact their ability to generate value over the long
term. Professional service providers are experiencing new

client requests related to ESG risks and opportunities.

Xil


Introduction

Investors and insurers alike are grappling with profound

uncertainty linked to ESG-related issues.”
With all the discussion, demand, and debate, leaders

must understand what ESG means for their business.

And they need to do it now.

What ESG Is—and Isn't

So, what is ESG? And, just as important, what is it not?
At its most basic, ESG refers to the performance criteria
through which a company communicates its impacts and
dependencies on the environment (E) and society (S). The
G refers to how well a company demonstrates that some-
one is appropriately responsible for managing corporate
opportunities and risks. E criteria might include data on å
company’s carbon emissions, waste to landfill, or natural
resource use. $ metrics might include rates of employee
turnover, gender pay gaps, or human rights standards. G
factors may include board structure or composition, ex-
ecutive compensation, and compliance.

Investors use ESG ratings to allocate capital, firms use
ESG ratings to communicate performance to stakehold-
ers, and analysts use ESG ratings to compare companies

and track change over time. So far, this may seem straight-

forward, but it gets more complicated.

Xiil


Introduction

Here is the key: A wide range of ESG criteria is used
to generate ratings by a diverse set of ratings agencies.
These ratings function akin to credit ratings, except ESG
agencies perform their analysis on nonfinancial data
and historically set their own criteria for what to priori-
tize and how. The challenge is that there are many ESG
ratings agencies and a potentially endless set of possible
ESG metrics, from carbon footprint and water usage to
fair wages and key performance indicators (KPIs) on
diversity, equity, and inclusion. ESG does not currently
benefit from a universally accepted common set of stan-
dards regarding what data matters most, let alone how to
measure, report, and interpret that information. Confu-
sion is inevitable.

Today's jargon does not help. You may hear the term
ESG' used alongside or even interchangeably with other
terms, including “corporate social responsibility” (CSR) or
“sustainability.” This is usually incorrect and only deep-
ens the muddle. CSR necessarily implies voluntary ac-
tivities and may even refer to philanthropic efforts by a
company. some CSR may be strategic, but some may not.
Sustainability is a broader term, referring to the degree
to which a company’s social and environmental impacts
and dependencies are reflected in corporate strategy and
business models. ESG is sometimes used in this way, but

it is more accurate to say that ESG criteria are nonfinan-

XIV


Introduction

cial information used by investors to complement their
understanding of a company’s financial performance.
Because ESG is about public-facing KPIs, a common
critique of ESG reporting is that it has become a_ beauty
contest,” a mere compliance exercise or public relations
gimmick. You will not be surprised that this is indeed
sometimes the case. However, at their best, ESG met-
rics should reflect a company’s performance on key so-
cial and environmental criteria, and the integration of
these criteria into the company’s value proposition. The
point of reporting, after all, is to drive decisions and re-
source allocation. Companies that limit themselves to
a compliance-based view of ESG risk spending time on
information gathering and reporting at the expense of
using ESG insights to formulate strategy and achieve

competitive advantage.

Why ESG Now

For you as an organizational leader, the scope for linking
ESG criteria to strategy is enormous: Modern companies
have raised living standards for billions of people across
the globe. In this sense, today’s corporations are doing
exactly what they were designed to do: deliver food, hous-

ing, clothing, transport, and a wide range of products

XV


Introduction

and services to the greatest possible number of people at
the lowest price.

However, these gains have often been achieved at sig-
nificant social and environmental cost. Sometimes called
negative externalities, these are costs that result from the
company’s actions, but which the company does not have
to pay. A classic example is from the food industry. While
food is now readily available for many more people than
ever across the globe—a momentous benefit, to be sure—
modern agricultural and processing techniques have also
transformed food production into a global industry es-
timated to be responsible for more than 25% of global
carbon emissions annually.* Food waste alone is respon-
sible for 6% of global carbon emissions, and agriculture
is host to more than 60% of child labor across the globe.>
The food industry receives regular critique for impacts
on obesity-related diseases and other public health con-
cerns as well as for its impact on nature.

As the food industry example suggests, today’s prob-
lems are often the result of yesterday’s solutions.” After all,

itable? But well-chosen ESG data can alert companies,
investors, and the public to when these improvements”
may be creating negative externalities, inefficiencies, and
risk. When you connect ESG metrics to the impacts upon

XVI


Introduction

which your company relies to create value, they can serve
as å powerful tool for building stronger, more resilient
businesses in healthy societies on a healthy planet. In
this way, they can be a powerful tool for value creation.
In some cases, this will be data your company does not
yet collect. It should begin to do so. In other cases, you
will have access to historical data that you can draw on
for analysis. In either case, there is an essential need
for boards and executive teams to identify the subset of
metrics that matters most to your business and focus on
building excellent data on that.

Keep in mind that not all ESG issues are equally impor-
tant for all firms, and companies cannot take meaningful
action on all areas at once. When ESG data is integrated
into a process of strategy and capital allocation, rather
than remaining a more passive, backward-looking report,
it can provide you with a window into one of the most
significant innovation opportunities of our time: how
to employ, feed, clothe, house, and transport a growing
population on a planet whose social systems are stressed
and whose environmental systems are in crisis. Here is
the invitation for your company to make bold strategic
choices that catapult new processes, materials, products,
and whole new industries into existence.

From this perspective, ESG is simply a tool through
which to better identify, understand, and communicate

xvil


Introduction

strategic choices. Used well, it enables you to focus your
ambitions, communicate your goals to investors and cus-

tomers, and grasp opportunities for new products and

markets.

What This Book Will Do

The current high level of interest—and confusion—about
ESG makes it an ideal topic for a book like this one. In
a context of rapidly changing ESG regulations and what
is often called an “alphabet soup” of metrics, leaders are
often unsure how to proceed with their companys ap-
proach to the ESG agenda. Depending on where you turn,
loud voices in the public debate may implore you to ignore
ESG entirely or to make it a cornerstone of your business
strategy. For leaders, the inevitable result is often (and un-
derstandably) inaction or fatigue.

In this book, researchers and practitioners set out
their views on what ESG means for business. That their
reflections cover a range of topics from governance and
AI to responsible computing is revealing: The bound-
aries of ESG are fuzzy. In public discourse, ESG often

becomes a proxy for macro questions about the role of
business in society. This book will not tell you what to

XVill


Introduction

think about ESG. Rather, it offers you a deep dive into
the state of the conversation and a range of views to con-
sider on the topic so that you can develop your under-
standing of what ESG means for your business and how
to move forward.

For each business, the issues to which ESG draws at-
tention will reveal corporate impacts, dependencies, and
opportunities. As you read this book, consider how you
can bring an innovation lens to each of the issues dis-
cussed. ESG is a means, not an end. Today, ESG ratings
may correlate poorly with one another. In the absence of

universal standards, that is not surprising. For a com-
pany interested in using the data for decision-making

on specific corporate priorities, it is also not necessarily
cause for concern. As a leader, you have the opportunity,
with your teams, to identify the social and environmen-

tal impacts and dependencies that matter most for your
business and for your stakeholders, and to persistently

pursue the data you need to gain a clear, strategic picture
of those issues. Key questions to consider as you read

include:

» If ESG is about gathering and reporting data on
key ESG metrics, how is the data being used in

decision-making in my organization?


Introduction

» What does my organization's ESG data tell me

about strategy and value creation in my company?

» How confident am I that my board and leadership

team can identify our company's top three envi-

ronmental impacts? Our social impacts?

» Do we have the data we need to build a strategy

that reflects our company’s key environmental and

social impacts?

- Is my company’s governance fit for delivering value

that reflects our key environmental and social

impacts?

Remember, not everything valuable can be measured,
and not all measurements are necessarily valuable. ESG
is not a replacement for strategy. On the contrary, in its
best form, it can be a strategic tool.

The conversation around ESG's role in business is mov-
ing and changing quickly. In a few years’ time, it will look
very different. Leaders who can integrate social and en-
vironmental impacts and dependencies into their strat-
egy now, and build the governance required to scale the
solutions that result, can go far beyond current debates
about ESG to build the world’s next generation of strong,

innovative, and resilient companies.

XX

— Eee ———_ _ om pe


Introduction

NOTES

1. IFRS, “International Sustainability Standards Board, IFRS,
2022, https://www.ifrs.org/groups/international-sustainability
-standards-board/.

2. SBTi, "Corporate Climate Action Accelerated in 2022, with an

87% Increase in Companies Setting Science-Based Targets, Sci-
ence Based Targets, August 17, 2023, https://sciencebasedtargets.org

/news/corporate-climate-action-accelerated-in-2022-with-an-87
-increase-in-companies-setting-science-based-targets; Robert G.

Eccles and Alison Taylor, "The Evolving Role of Chief Sustainabil-
ity Officers,” Harvard Business Review, July-August, https://hbr.org
/2023/07/the-evolving-role-of-chief-sustainability-officers.

3. Ian Smith, Attracta Mooney, and Aime Williams, "The Unin-

surable World: What Climate Change Is Costing Homeowners,
Financial Times, February 13, 2024, https://www.ft.com/content

/ed3albb9-e329-4e18-89de-9db90eaadcOb.

4 Hannah Ritchie, Pablo Rosado, and Max Roser, “Environmen-
tal Impacts of Food Production, Our World in Data, 2022, https://

ourworldindata.org/environmental-impacts-of-food.

5 Hannah Ritchie, “Food Waste Is Responsible for 6% of Global
Greenhouse Gas Emissions, Our World in Data, March 18,

2020, https://ourworldindata.org/food-waste-emissions; Inter-
national Labour Organization, “Child Labour in Agriculture

(IPEC),” ILO.org, 2019, https://www.ilo.org/ipec/areas/Agriculture

/lang--en/index.htm.

6. World Health Organization, “Obesity,” World Health

Organization, 2024, https://www.who.int/health-topics
/obesity#tab=tab_1; Ritchie, Rosado, and Roser, "Environmental

Impacts of Food Production.”


Introduction

M. Senge, The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of th
of the

7, Peter
1990; repr., London: Random House B
USj-

Learning Organization (
ness, 2006).

XXii


Section 1

BUILDING AN ESG
STRATEGY


THE ESSENTIAL
LINK BETWEEN
ESG TARGETS

AND FINANGIAL
PERFORMANGE

by Mark R. Kramer and Marc W. Pfitzer

n recent years tremendous progress has been made

in standardizing and quantifying measures of com-

panies’ performance on environmental, social, and

governance (ESG) criteria. There has also been a surge

in investor interest in companies that are rated highly on


Kramer and Pfitzer

ESG performance OI appear to be = ESG goals seri
ously. Yet surprisingly few ape are making mean.
ingful progress in delivering on their ESG commitments
Of the 2,000 global companies tracked by the World
Benchmarking Alliance, most have no explicit sustain.
ability goals, and among those that do, very few are on
track to meet them. Even companies that are making pro-
gress are, in most cases, merely instituting slow and in-
cremental changes without the fundamental strategic and
operational shifts necessary to meet the Paris Agreement
or the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
If companies neither integrate ESG factors into in-
ternal strategy and operational decisions nor commu-
nicate with investors about how improvements in ESG
performance affect corporate earnings, then their claims
about progress on sustainability goals are, at best, mere
public relations—and at worst, deliberate misdirection.
A few companies—including Sweden-based home-
builder BoKlok; Enel, the Italy-based electric utility;
South Africa-based insurer Discovery; Mars Wrigley,
the candy and chewing gum division of Mars; and food
giant Nestlé—are building sustainability into their strat-
egy and operations by connecting financial and social
performance. (Disclosure: These companies have been
clients of our firm, FSG, or sponsors of its Shared Value

Initiative.) This article offers a six-step process that other


The Essential Link Between ESG Targets and Financial Performance

companies can use to fully integrate ESG performance

into their core business models.

The Problem with Separate Systems

Over more than 20 years of researching and working on
sustainability issues with Fortune 100 companies around
the world, we've found that when the measurement and
accountability system for ESG performance IS entirely
divorced from the one that defines profitability and de-
termines share price, leaders become blinded to the in-
terdependence between the two types of performance.
Indeed, the heightened attention to ESG reporting has
not, for the most part, changed the way companies make
decisions about strategy and capital investment. Nor has
it helped reveal the tensions and opportunities that arise
from understanding how ESG performance affects cor-
porate profitability. As a result, most companies still treat
sustainability as an afterthought—a matter of reputa-
tion, regulation, and reporting rather than as an essential
component of corporate strategy. Capital allocation and
operational budgeting decisions continue to be made
in ways that lead to social and environmental damage,

while firms rely on meager corporate social responsibil-
ity (CSR) budgets, philanthropy, and public relations to


Kramer and Pfitzer

retroactively remedy or deflect the problems that those

become “consistent with” the Paris Agreement by reduc.

ing the environmental impact of its operations. At the
same time, the company intends to continue to invest

heavily in new oil and gas properties. Existing ESG rating

systems allow the company to report on only the emis-
sions from its internal operations, without taking into ac-
count the environmental consequences of the oil and gas
it sells. By that flawed measure, ExxonMobil ranks in the
top quartile out of nearly 30,000 companies in consen-
sus ESG ratings. Its much-publicized commitment of
$15 billion to low-carbon solutions ignores the $256 bil-
lion in 2019 revenues that were entirely dependent on fossil
fuels, which makes the company the fifth-largest pro-
ducer of greenhouse gases (GHG) on the planet. In short,
neither ExxonMobil’s massive impact on the planet nor
the existential dilemma facing the companys economic
future are fully reflected in the ESG rating or factored into
management's strategic decisions.

Or consider Tyson Foods, a producer of chicken, beef,
and pork. In 2016 Tyson made a commitment to reduce
its greenhouse gas emissions by 30% by 2030, but since
then, its GHG emissions actually increased an average of
3% annually. Our analysis suggests that it is impossible


The Essential Link Between ESG Targets and Financial Performance

for Tyson to fulfill its financial projections and simul-
taneously meet its stated ESG goals. Tyson is not alone.
Pefoue companies have made ESG commitments that
are incompatible with business realities—and as long as
ESG metrics and financial reporting are disconnected,
these inconsistencies will continue.

If companies are to move beyond mere posturing, lead-
ers must confront the contradictions—and embrace the
synergies—between profit and societal benefits and make
the bold changes needed to actually deliver on the goals of
the Paris Agreement and the United Nations 17 Sustain-

able Development Goals.
Let's look at the six-step process for doing that in detail.

1. Identify the ESG Issues Material
to Your Company

A good place to start is to consult the International Sus-
tainability Standards Board’s listing of material ESG
issues by industry, defined as “those governance, sus-
tainability, or societal factors likely to affect the financial
condition or operating performance of businesses within

a specific sector.
In some cases, the link between material ESG issues

and financial performance is simple and direct. The


Kramer and Pfitzer

bulk of ExxonMobil s revenues obviously come from it
-ustomers’ use of fossil fuels—even though it doesn't fe
port on greenhouse gas emissions generated by Custom.
ers in its sustainability report. The most materia] issue for
Discovery, a global life and health insurance company,
‘< customer health, which directly affects its financia]
performance. But unlike ExxonMobil, Discovery cop.
fronts the connection between those issues head-on. It
uses a sophisticated set of rewards to encourage its sub-
scribers (individuals and their dependents) to engage in
healthier behaviors, such as more exercise, better diets
and regular checkups. It tracks the cost of the incentives,
their effectiveness in changing behavior, and the impact of
behavior changes on medical costs and health outcomes,

Discovery uses this approach to continuously optimize
the relationship between customer health and the com-
panys bottom line. It has made numerous investments
that differentiate it from other life and health insurers—
such as giving its customers free Apple watches that en-
able the company to remotely monitor physical activity
and track more than 11 million customer exercise readings
per day. Promoting customer health as a core component
of corporate strategy has created a unique competitive
position and fueled Discovery’s global expansion and
superior profitability relative to other insurers. Rigorous
academic studies by RAND, Johns Hopkins, and others


The Essential Link Between ESG Targets and Financial Performance

have shown that the medical costs of Discovery's health
insurance subscribers are 15% lower compared with those
insured by local competitors, and the life expectancy of
Discovery's life insurance customers is 10 years longer.
In other industries, the link between the social and en-
vironmental impact of a company’s actions and profits
may be more complex. In the food and beverage sector,
the nutritional value of the products sold is an obvious and
direct material issue; what's less visible are the operations
of the suppliers of commodity inputs, which can repre-
sent 50% or more of all financial costs. Agricultural com-

modities like those Mars Wrigley uses are often sourced
from smallholder farmers in South America, Africa, and

Asia. While they offer a substantial cost advantage over
commodities sourced from large-scale commercial grow-
ers in developed countries and generate income for small-

holder farmers, the less sophisticated farming practices

they use raise troubling social and environmental issues,
including child labor, water scarcity, and deforestation,

which accelerates climate change.
Mars Wrigley systematically tracks the carbon foot-

print and water intensity of the crops it purchases across
the globe, along with farmers income. Its challenge is
to maintain a cost advantage by sourcing from lower-

‘ncome countries while reducing poverty and environ-

mental harm. Applying this approach to its sourcing of


Kramer and Pfitzer

mint from smallholder farmers in India, for example, hal
-esulted in a 26% increase in farmers earnings and a 48%
decrease in unsustainable water use, while allowing the

company to sustain a significant cost advantage.

2 Focus on Your Strategy, Not on Reporting

The greatest social and environmental impacts of any
company will be the result of fundamental strategic
choices rather than incremental operational improve-
ments. Startups, unencumbered by the past, often find
strategic advantages by rethinking industry business
models in light of current knowledge. When Discovery
first entered the insurance market almost 30 years ago, it
leveraged the ways that diet and behavior influence health
to invent a more profitable business model that was un-
like that of its more established health insurance com-
petitors. In seeking to tap into consumers’ concern about
climate change, Tesla used new software and technol-
ogy to invent the first popular electric vehicle. But many
long-established companies still operate with business
models that were developed decades—even centuries—
ago, when leaders were unaware of or routinely ignored
the impact that their businesses had on social conditions

10


The Essential Link Between ESG Targets and Financial Performance

and the environment. They react to ESG issues only at
the eleventh hour and are therefore poorly positioned to
compete in a world where social and environmental im-
pact drives shareholder value.

Virtually all incumbent automobile companies are
now scrambling to catch up with the demand for elec-
tric vehicles after decades of focusing on incrementally
improving the miles-per-gallon performance of their ve-
hicles or reducing factory emissions. That is exactly the
kind of strategic shift at the core of the business model
that companies in every industry will need to make—
and quickly.

The best way to ensure that your company is address-
ing its material, social, and environmental challenges is
to relinquish your focus on modest change and improve-
ments in reporting and instead identify and pursue bold
new opportunities. Confront the fundamental question
of how you will reinvent your business model and dit-
ferentiate your company from competitors by building
positive social and environmental outcomes into your
strategy. Communicating a clear and compelling com-
petitive strategy to create shared value—how you will
pursue financial success in a way that also yields societal
benefits—will carry far more weight with investors than

marginal improvements in ESG metrics.


Kramer and Pfitzer

3. Optimize the Impact Intensity of Profits

Instead of relying only on conventional cost/benefit

analyses and ‘nternal rate of return calculations to make

budgetary and capital expenditure decisions, companies
must begin to use equations that factor in the primary
social and environmental effects of their operations. The
impact intensity of profits is the relationship between a
company’s profits and its most important positive or
negative effect on ESG issues. For the power company
Enel, the primary issue 1s the environmental impact of
its operational footprint, which means the company
should make investment decisions that optimize profit
per tons of CO, emitted. For Nestle, the primary con-
cerns are the nutritional value of its products and the
ESG effects of sourcing from smallholders. The company
might optimize profit generated per micrograms of nu-
tritional value in its products and the cost of raw materi-
als relative to farmer income and environmental impact
in its sourcing. And for BoKlok, a joint venture between
Skanska and IKEA, the primary societal benefit comes
jag expanding access to affordable and attractive hous-
ing in urban areas. Up to 40% of its developments are
sold to social housing associations. This is the result of

a decision-making framework that links profits to spe

12


The Essential Link Between ESG Targets and Financial Performance

cific ceilings on the prices that the associations and other
buyers have to pay.

Product design, product access, and operational foot-
print are three domains where companies must change
their internal decision-making processes from focusing
purely on financial returns to making a more sophisti-
cated analysis that includes social and environmental
consequences. The mathematical relationship between
changes in environmental or social factors and the result-
ing changes in profit must become the guiding frame-
work for decision-making at all levels within the company.
The results are likely to lead to significantly different
choices that not only improve ESG performance but also

help reposition the company in ways that improve finan-

cial performance.

Product design

Nestlé has long been concerned about the nutritional
value of its food products, and until 2007, it made the same
kinds of modest incremental changes in reducing salt, fat,
and sugar content that other major food and beverage
companies were making. But beginning in 2007, Nestlé
began connecting the material issue of nutrition to its

strategy and new-product design. ‘This led the company to

13


Kramer and Pfitzer

st more than $1 billion annually in research to develop
» nutritional supplements with measurable

inve
“nutraceuticals,
health benefits such as a reduction in postsurgical infec-

tions or a decrease In the number of seizures suffered by

epileptics. These products, sold not through grocery stores
but in pharmacies or administered in hospitals and reim-
bursed by insurers, have propelled the growth of Nestlé's
nutrition and health science division. It is now the com-
pany's fastest-growing and most profitable division, with
more than $14 billion in sales.

For Enel, whose main product is electricity, the shift
toward a low-carbon world has created new product op-
portunities. Enel now offers power-management services
to its customers: It helps homeowners reduce electricity
usage, works with businesses to optimize the operations
of fleets of electric vehicles, and guides cities in build-
ing infrastructure in ways that continuously minimize
power consumption and provide charging options for
electric vehicles.

Companies that don’t link the social and environmen-
tal consequences of their businesses directly to their busi-
ness models and strategic choices will never fully deliver
on their ESG commitments. Tyson Foods will continue
to expand sales of beef as the main driver of profits to
meet its financial targets, even though beef generates the

largest amount of greenhouse gas emissions per ton of

14


The Essential Link Between ESG Targets and Financial Performance

protein of all the company's products. If Tyson were seri-
ous about optimizing profits and substantially reducing
GHG emissions, it would need to make a dramatic shift
in strategy and invest much more heavily in plant-based
and cellular meat alternatives—a strategy that would dra-
matically reduce its emissions and potentially increase
its profit per ton of protein produced as the plant-based

meat segment scales and matures.

Product access

The objective of BoKlok is to profitably develop energy-
efficient housing that teachers, nurses, and other lower-

wage workers can afford to buy or rent. BoKlok uses a
detailed analysis of people’s salaries, cost of living, and
typical monthly expenses as the benchmark for ceilings
on its sale prices. Manufacturing the homes in a factory
reduces both the cost of the housing and the carbon emis-
sions produced during construction. (BoKlok has made
4 commitment to reach net-zero carbon emissions—
from manufacturing, sourcing, and even the energy
consumption of the homes it builds—by 2030.) Factor-
ing access and affordability into its investment decisions
has heavily influenced its choices—such as collaborating
with municipalities in Sweden, Finland, Norway, and the

15


Kramer and Pfitzer

United Kingdom to buy land. The reward is a rapidly ex
panding new market opportunity: Since creating its in.
dustrialized affordable-housing model in 2010, Bok]ok

has built 14,000 homes, while routinely outperforming
Skanska’s conventional construction business on a return.

on-capital-employed basis.

Operational footprint

Greenhouse gas emissions from electricity generation is
Enel’s most material issue, along with its customers’ energy
use. So Enel has invested €48 billion over three years (2021
through 2023) in renewable power generation, upgrades to
improve the efficiency of its distribution network, and new
energy-saving technologies for end users. These invest-
ments will help Enel reduce its reliance on coal-fired power
plants from 10% in 2021 to only 1% by 2023. They will also
dramatically increase profit per ton of CO, emitted and
decrease emissions from 214 grams of CO, to 148 grams
CO, per kWh—while delivering an EBITDA compound
annual growth rate of 5% to 6% to shareholders.

A primary issue for Mars Wrigley, as noted earlier, is
the footprint of its commodities sourcing. So the company
systematically sets baseline performance measures for
climate, water, land, gender-specific income, and human

16


The Essential Link Between ESG Targets and Financial Performance

rights across each of its commodities. Each commod-
ity has a different footprint: For cocoa, the most critical
ESG factors are farmer poverty and deforestation; for
dairy products, land and water use are important. Issues
vary even within a given commodity: Sugar is a key in-
gredient in Mars Wrigley’s products, but if it is sourced
from beets, the biggest consideration is water use, whereas
sourcing from sugarcane raises issues of poverty and

human rights.
If Mars Wrigley had ignored suppliers’ social and en-

vironmental factors, the drive to maximize profit would
inevitably have led it to purchase from smallholders with
the worst social and environmental impacts, given that

labor and environmental practices tend to improve with

more sophisticated and costly farming. Buying higher-
priced commodities from large-scale commercial farm-

ers might improve the company’s ESG performance, but
doing so would also increase its costs and do nothing
to reduce the poverty of smallholders and the environ-
mental degradation that their farming practices cause.
Integrating sustainability factors into its procurement
process has enabled Mars Wrigley to maintain a cost ad-
vantage and, by making carefully calibrated investments
in helping small farmers, communities, and supply chain
partners change their practices, to reduce poverty and

harm to the environment.

17


Kramer and Pfitzer

4 Collaborate to Avoid Trade-offs |
Between Profit and Societal Benefit

Win-win solutions that improve both societal benefits and

profits are easy to adopt, but most companies stop short
when they confront trade-offs that require sacrificing profit
for improved social or environmental performance. Such
trade-offs, however, often can be avoided by collaborating
with other stakeholders. In fact, many levers that affect
a company’s impact intensity of profit are controlled by
only a few external stakeholders.

Sugarcane cutters in Latin America have, for decades,
been paid in cash on the basis of the weight of the sug-
arcane they cut. The pace at which cutters work deter-
mines how much distance they cover in a day, but the
weight of the cane they cut depends on factors outside
their control, such as the type of sugarcane planted, the
irrigation and fertilization practices, and the weather.
The team leaders, who traditionally hand out the cut-
ters pay, have complete discretion in how much to pay
each worker, and there are no controls to ensure that
each worker receives their due. The result is that many
cutters take home far less than a living wage. An ongoing

pilot project involving sugarcane mills, purchasers, and
local NGOs has found a way to address these issues: It

18


The Essential Link Between ESG Targets and Financial Performance

combines a minimum daily wage with additional com-
pensation based on the amount cut. Digital payments
are transferred directly to the cutters’ mobile phones to
ensure that they promptly receive what they have earned.
Together these measures can raise cutters wages by 25%
while increasing the cost of sugarcane to the mills by less
than 5%, most of which is expected to be offset over time
through productivity gains.

Enel found success with a different type of collabora-

tion. The company needed world-class engineering talent
in order to make its shift from fossil fuel to renewable

energy, but the most talented environmental engineers
did not want to work for an electric utility that still relied

heavily on fossil fuel. So the company turned to crowd-
sourcing. It has posted more than 170 of its most difficult

technical problems on its Open Innovability digital plat-
form, which reaches 500,000 “active solvers’ from more
than 100 countries. So far, they have proposed some 7,000
solutions to those challenges. Enel’s engineers evaluate
them and either award cash prizes to winners or estab-
lish joint ventures with them.

For example, the shift to renewable power depends, in
part, on batteries large enough to smooth out the fluctua-
tions in solar- and wind-generated power for an entire

city. This is a big challenge because the storage capacity of

19


Kramer and Pfitzer

today’s batteries is severely limited and extremely expen-

sive. As electric vehicles become more common, electric

car batteries could be used to store power and provide
it when needed. Using just 5% of the stored energy in
car batteries could balance the power grid for an entire
city. Enel had the idea but lacked the software needed to
allow the batteries to contribute electricity to the grid.
A six-person startup based in Delaware learned of the
opportunity through the Open Innovability platform and
provided the software solution.

Collaboration with other stakeholders, whether com-
panies, governments, or NGOs, requires a new degree of
cross-sector trust and collaboration. The game of blam-
ing one another for social or environmental problems will

have to give way to a partnership in which everyone en-
dorses a shared agenda. In the process, positive outcomes

become compatible with profits, and baseline measures,

strategies, and investments are developed jointly.

9. Redesign Organizational Roles

Despite the increased attention to ESG performance,
most companies have done little to change their orga-

nizational roles and structures to integrate sustainabil-
ity into operations. CSR departments are typically very

20

>— > MEGET Te he ee tr


The Essential Link Between ESG Targets and Financial Performance

small and uninvolved in strategic and operational deci-
sions. They focus primarily on stakeholder and govern-
ment relations, philanthropy, and ESG reporting. but
if ESG criteria are to be integrated into key decisions,
then people with sustainability expertise need to be at
the table when strategic and operational decisions are

made.
Enel has made that change. Its innovation and sus-

tainability functions are combined under a “chief innov-
ability officer,” who oversees, on a matrix basis, a team of
people who hail from every department to ensure that all
decisions include a sustainability analysis. Mars Wrig-
ley created the combined role of “chief procurement and
sustainability officer.” BoKlok and Skanska similarly cre-

ated an executive vice president position to oversee sus-

tainability and innovation.
Incentives must also be aligned. Compensation schemes

must reward performance for reaching not just financial
but also social and environmental goals. Some ESG-related
compensation bonuses are “artfully” designed so that they
can be awarded even if emissions increase or environmen-
tal damage worsens. Obviously, that renders such incen-
tives ineffective. Companies that take ESG goals seriously
make sure that a significant part of executives’ bonuses are
dependent on achieving them. At Mars, the top 300 cor-
porate leaders receive long-term incentive compensation

21


Kramer and Pfitzer

(above salary and annual bonuses) on the basis of their suc-
cess in achieving equally weighted financial and emissions-
reduction goals over a three-year period. And Mastercard
recently announced incentive compensation for all em-
ployees that includes performance metrics around three

material issues: carbon emissions, financial inclusion, and
gender equity.

6. Bring Investors Along

Companies must explain to investors their strategies for
improving the impact intensity of their profits, commu-
nicate their commitments to achieving explicit goals,
and report publicly on their progress. Spelling out how

the company is incorporating positive social impact
into its business model will carry far more weight with
investors who care about climate targets and sustain-

able development goals than flawed and inconsistent
ESG rankings.

Nestle, for example, which has been steadily reducing

sugar, salt, and fat across its product portfolio for more
than a decade, began only in 2018 to disclose to inves-
tors that these healthier foods had faster growth rates and

higher profit margins than traditional offerings. Enel has

22

|
|
|
|


The Essential Link Between ESG Targets and Financial Performance

long described its shift to renewables in its sustainability
reports and taken pride in its efforts to advance the UN's

Sustainable Development Goals, but only in November
2019 did it first highlight the financial value driven by the
renewables business model in its Enel Capital Markets
Day investor presentation. In the following three months,
when most stocks plunged because of the Covid-19 pan-
demic, Enel’s share price increased almost 24%, a change
that management attributes to this shift in communica-
tion strategy. Unless companies clearly explain the finan-
cial benefit of their ESG improvements to their investors,
they will not see the value of those efforts reflected in their

share prices.

We cannot continue the path we are on today, where
companies’ social and environmental actions are after-

the-fact interventions disconnected from strategy and
decision-making. Focusing on shared value and the eco-
nomics of impact will lead companies to make fundamen-
tal changes to their business models, capital investments,
and operations, generating meaningful opportunities for
differentiation and competitive advantage. In doing so,
they will create an economy that truly works to close so-

cial inequities and restore natural ecosystems.

23


Kramer and Pfitzer

Despite heightened attention to ESG issues, few compa-

nies are making meaningful progress in delivering on
their commitments. To integrate ESG efforts into their
core strategy and operational decisions, firms should take

these steps:

1. Identify the ESG issues most material to your

business.

2. Factor in ESG effects when making strategic,
financial, and operational decisions.

3. Optimize the impact intensity of profits—the rela-
tionship between profits and the most important
positive or negative effect on ESG issues.

4. Collaborate with stakeholders to avoid trade-offs
between profit and societal benefit.

5. Redesign organizational roles to integrate sustain-
ability into operations.

24


The Essential Link Between ESG Targets and Financial Performance

6. Communicate to investors your strategies for and
commitments to achieving explicit goals, and re-

port publicly on progress.

Adapted from an article in Harvard Business Review, September-October 2022
(product #R2205K).

25


DOES YOUR COMPANY
NEED A CHIEF ESG

OFFICER?

by Robert Langan and Markus Menz

here’s a new title in the C-suite: chief ESG officer.
While top executives with “ESG” in their title are
new and not yet widespread, this role is an opportu-
nity that companies may consider as they face increasing
pressure to address environmental, social, and governance
issues; companies like C.H. Robinson, Royal Caribbean,
and Verizon have recently appointed chief ESG officers.
But what does a chief ESG officer do? And when should a

company have one?

2]


Langan and Menz

To find out, We analyzed senior executives from more
than 1,400 U.S. public companies in 2020 and 2021. Using
insights from this analysis and from studying other top
executives, We developed three questions that CEOs and
boards should ask before creating a chief ESG officer

position.

Do Your Stakeholders Care About ESG?

While shareholders are becoming increasingly focused
on ESG, so too are other company stakeholders. For in-
stance, a survey conducted by Nielsen in 2019 found that
48% of consumers cared about ESG.' This number in-
creased to 83% among millennials. Employees care, too.
According to a survey reported on hbr.org, nine out of 10
employees said that they would trade a portion of their
life’s earnings for greater meaning at work.* As work con-
tinues to evolve in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic
and the Great Resignation, it’s becoming increasingly
evident that employees are emphasizing what they do,
how they are treated, and whether their work is having a
positive impact.

Appointing a chief ESG officer signals to stakeholders
that your company takes ESG issues seriously. Beyond
sending a positive signal, a chief ESG officer can also send

28


Does Your Company Need a Chief ESG Officer?

more substantive ESG information back to stakeholders.
Indeed, companies like UGI Corporation and Verizon
highlight that their chief ESG officers are charged with
the reporting and voluntary disclosure of their ESG ef-
forts. In addition, with a top executive focused on ESG Is-
sues, who ideally has direct CEO access, ESG gets a strong
voice in the C-suite.

Hence, if ESG is particularly relevant to your com-
pany's stakeholders, it may be worth appointing a chief
ESG officer to ensure that ESG issues receive sufficient

attention and influence.

What Role Does ESG Play in Your Strategy?

ESG is becoming a cornerstone of many companies
strategies. For some, ESG has been more of a compli-
ance or communication concern. For others, ESG has
become a strategic concern or opportunity. Our analy-
sis reveals that chief ESG officers are present in compa-
nies that make concerted efforts to incorporate ESG into
their strategies. For instance, C.H. Robinson, a major
logistics company, has specifically directed its strategy
toward developing technology to help its customers with

ESG concerns. Semtech, a company that supplies high
performance analogs, semiconductors, and advanced

29


gorithms, identified five key strategic ESG initiative,
for 2021. Tenneco, an automotive components company,
developed a framework to align the company’s corporate
strategy to ESG-related impacts. In all these cases. the
chief ESG officer plays an important role in driving Esc

in the corporate strategy.
When a company’s strategy needs to be built around

4 certain function or element, research demonstrates
that including a C-level executive with the correspond.
ing knowledge and responsibility in strategy formation
is the best way to do it. Companies have long been doing
this for other strategic concerns and have appointed top
executives like a chief digital officer or chief innovation
officer.

Hence, if ESG is becoming an integral element of your
company’s strategy, it’s time to think about appointing
a chief ESG officer to inform strategy development and

execution.

Would a Chief ESG Officer Be Complementary?

A chief ESG officer should truly complement the C-suite.
Companies therefore need to consider the role of the chief

ESG officer vis-a-vis their other top executive roles and

30

i
I
k


Does Your Company Need a Chief ESG Officer?

ensure that appointing one is adding value to the execu-
tive team. One of the biggest challenges of ESG is that
it is so multifaceted and complex. The World Economic
Forum identified 21 core metrics and 34 expanded metrics
to measure a firm’s ESG impact.’ Thomson Reuters Refini-
tiv, which many academic researchers use when conduct-
ing studies on ESG, calculates a company’s ESG score from
more than 450 metrics. It is no surprise that some of these
metrics across the ESG pillars of environment, social, and
governance might conflict with one another.

Our analysis of chief ESG officers uncovers that they
focus on all aspects of ESG and, importantly, on balanc-
ing the sometimes competing demands of the individual
pillars. For instance, in announcing the appointment of a
chief ESG officer, Royal Caribbean’s CEO highlighted the
need to consider the interplay between legal, geopolitical,
environmental, and social issues. Others, like Verizon,
tasked their chief ESG officer with developing a frame-
work to tackle the most important ESG elements that the
company faced. This focus on the bigger picture is what
distinguishes a chief ESG officer from other positions
that may focus on individual aspects of ESG. This is also
why some companies opt for a chief ESG officer in addi-
tion to other C-suite positions like a chief sustainability

officer or chief diversity officer.


Langan and Menz

Hence, if your company IS faced with complex ESG d
e.
mands and the existing C-suite positions are not fulfillin
B

your ESG needs, you may want to consider adding a Chief

ESG oflicer.

A Transformational Role

Answering these three questions should be the first step
for CEOs and boards of directors to assess whether they
need a chief ESG officer. What should come next is a de-
tailed analysis of the responsibilities the position must
have. While these depend on your company’s specific ap-
proach toward ESG, we found that chief ESG officers have

a common role across companies. At the heart of their
role is coordinating ESG efforts in their organization,
both horizontally between the ESG pillars and functions,
and vertically across hierarchical levels up to the CEO.
Another key role of the chief ESG officer is transform-
ing the company to become more ESG-oriented. This is
what clearly distinguishes them from ESG managers of
lower ranks. Of course, a person in the role must still
report ESG efforts and communicate with stakeholders.
But when you opt for an ESG executive in your C-suite,
the role must go well beyond that of reporting and

contribute to your companys development. Chief ESG

32


Does Your Company Need a Chief ESG Officer?

officers do so as they inform board discussions, build
strategies to address opportunities related to ESG, and
drive ESG initiatives. If you then find the right person
for the job, your chief ESG officer will be truly transfor-

mational for your company.

With increasing pressure to address environmental,

social, and governance issues, many organizations are
bringing a new face into the C-suite: the chief ESG of-

ficer. If you're wondering if your company needs one, ask

these questions:

/ Do your stakeholders care about ESG? A chief ESG of-
ficer can send substantial ESG information back to

stakeholders, and appointing one also signals that

your company takes ESG seriously.

/ What role does ESG play in your strategy? If ESG is be-

coming an integral element of your strategy, ap-
pointing a chief ESG officer could help inform its

development and execution.


Langan and Menz

7 Would a chief ES6 officer be complementary? A chjec i
officer may add value to the team if your c ompany
‘< faced with complex ESG demands and the id

ing C-suite positions are not fulfilling your nee ds

NOTES

1. Nielseniq, “Was 2018 the Year of the Influential Sustainable
Consumer?” Nielseniq, December 17, 2018, https://nielseniq
com/global/en/insights/analysis/2018/was-2018-the-year-of-the
influential-sustainable-consumer/.

3 Shawn Achor et al., “9 Out of 10 People Are Willing to Earn
Less Money to Do More-Meaningful Work,” hbr.org, November 6,
2018, https://hbr.org/2018/11/9-out-of-10-people-are-willing-to
-earn-less-money-to-do-more-meaningful-work.

3. World Economic Forum, “Measuring Stakeholder Capitalism:
Towards Common Metrics and Consistent Reporting of Sus-
tainable Value Creation,” World Economic Forum White Paper,
September 2020, https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_IBC
_Measuring_Stakeholder_Capitalism_Report_2020.pdf.

4. LSEG, “Environmental, Social, and Governance Scores from
LSEG,” LSEG, December 2023, https://www.Iseg.com/content/dam

/data-analytics/en us/documents/methodology/lseg-esg-scores
-methodology.pdf.

Adapted from content posted on hbr.org, February 17, 2022 (product HO6VMX)

34


THE ESG ISSUES
THAT MATTER MOST

TO PEOPLE

by Daniel J. Benjamin, Ori Heffetz, and Michael M. Weinstein

or many corporate managers, improving their firms
ESG performance is a central goal. To achieve it,
they face trade-offs: Should they improve treatment
of their workers, or instead reduce carbon emissions‘

Should they protect shareholders or the human rights of

overseas workers?
To help them set priorities, decades of research—some

of it by us—suggest a surprisingly underused approach to

39


Å 3

Benjamin, Heffetz, and Weinstein

figuring out which corporate behaviors are most impor-

tant to ordinary people: Ask them!
Their answers can be stated plainly. When asked to

judge the overall behaviors of American firms, the pub-
lic places outsized importance on the firms’ treatment
of workers. Taken together, issues around the treatment
of workers are considered most important by roughly
three times as many people as issues around the treat-
ment of communities/neighborhoods, customers, share-
holders, and the environment—which are all valued
similarly to each other. In these surveys, the same pri-
orities emerge year after year and across demographic
and political groups.

These results come out of research carried out by JUST
Capital (JUST), a nonprofit cofounded and chaired by
philanthropist Paul Tudor Jones. His mission is to harness
capitalism to solve society's gravest threats. JUST focuses
on, well, justness—which is not identical to ESG. But the
two concepts are closely related, and justness may be more
easily understood by the public.

JUST publishes its rankings of the justness of American
firms each year in the expectation that consumers, em-
ployees, and investors will use the information to reward

corporate leaders and punish corporate laggards. Unlike
rankings of ESG that rely heavily on expert opinion, the

36


The ESG Issues That Matter Most to People

core tenet of JUST's methodology is to rely on the public
to define justness and judge what matters most.

Io do this every year, JUST convenes small focus groups
across the country to flesh out what the participants deem
most relevant to the concept of just corporate behavior.
Regarding the term justness, all that participants are told
is: “A just company operates in a way that serves its work-
ers, customers, shareholders, the environments, and the
communities it affects, even if it comes at a cost.” Based
on the focus group discussions, a list of 20 behaviors most
central to justness is determined. Two examples: Does
the firm pay at least a living wage to all its employees? Do
corporate leaders behave in a manner that reflects high
ethical standards?

To estimate the relative importance of each of the 20
behaviors, JUST uses a panel of survey research partici-
pants who broadly match the demographics of the U.S.
population. They are given the same description of what
is meant by justness. Then four of the 20 behaviors are
randomly picked, and each participant is asked to iden-
tify the behavior that is most important to justness and
the behavior that is least important. Each participant
completes this exercise 10 times, each time facing a dif-
ferent selection of four behaviors from which to iden-
tify the most and least important behavior. Statistical

37


Benjamin, Heffetz, and Weinstein

analysis of the data—tens of thousands of Participant
choices—yields an estimate of the probability that a ran-
dom survey respondent would rank that issue as the
most important of all 20 issues. JUST uses the results of
this analysis to assign weights to the 20 behaviors, con-
structing an overall justness score for each Russell 1000
company, and publishes these rankings (both overall and
split by industry).

Figure 3-1 shows the probabilities estimated for the 20
behaviors in JUST's 2022 survey. The figure categorizes
the behaviors into five stakeholder categories: workers,
communities, customers, shareholders and governance,
and the environment. It is clear from the figure that
worker-related behaviors account for the lion's share of
peoples concerns. Of the five worker-related behaviors,
four are among the top six behaviors—and one of the two
top behaviors that is not categorized as worker-related,
the second-ranked issue "creates jobs in the U.S.” is ar-
guably also worker-related. The total probability that a
worker-related issue would be judged as most important

is 44% compared with a range of 12% to 18% for the other
categories of behaviors.

That worker-related issues score highest is perhaps not
surprising. But the gap between them and all other be-
haviors is notable. Indeed, concatenating just the top two
behaviors in figure 3-1, which jointly comprise what an

38


nat 0 people want from companies?

eal, a ” Participants dee
oy? ne concept of ‘just corporate behavior. Based on the discussions a list of . most rele-
central to justness IS determined. The behaviors are then ranked by importan O behaviors
a by på ticipants who match the demographics of the U.s Population ve WIG surveys
ar «hart shows the estimated probability that a random respondent would rank
nehavior aS most important, by stakeholder category. ny 9 Gorpo-
te
— Stakeholder category —
Communities Environment
Workers | Customers Shareholders

eee

Pays workers fairly and offers a living wage th
cost of basic needs at the local evel iran

Compels leadership to act ethically and with integrity and to
avoid wrongdoings

Minimizes air, water, and soil pollution to safeguard human
health

SITTET TT TT TTS ETT TT eee eee ee
ee

Monitors human rights issues in its global supply chain and
addresses violations such as unfair labor practices

Treats customers with respect and provides a positive
customer experience

Reduces its environmental impact by using sustainable
materials across its products, services, and operations

TLL EEE EEE Tee Tee EEE NENNE NENNE EEE EE Er kp Ep EH HL LHL hhv

Is transparent in communications with customers about its
products, services, and operations

Combats global climate change by reducing its own carbon
emissions

Contributes to community development by supporting local

2.3 school and businesses and by engaging with residents in the
communny 5552 OIE OLR GE ROR TRICO Se

policies that hold the company accountable to the needs of all
stakeholders en OO

TT PEER EE ET EN a a ET
PPP 899928989 SO 50S OOO SOOSSCOOREHESESOSOEOESESOEREBESSELESASAESSL AE dar

volunteering, and community programs

"CE: JUST Capital’

S 2022 survey
eg

a


Benjamin, Heffetz, and Weinstein

estimated one-third (32.3%) of respondents think jc the
top-ranked behavior, tells much of the story: Create iobe
(11.1%) that pay fairly (21.2%).

In figure 3-2, the top shows the aggregated Probabili.
ties for the five stakeholder categories over two years of
JUST’s surveys, 2021 and 2022 (in earlier years, the list of
behaviors was somewhat different). Just below are results
from the 2022 survey, showing the aggregated probabiji.
ties broken down by demographics for a few illustrative
demographic categories. ‘The results—and, in particular
the outsize importance of worker-related issues—are
remarkably consistent over time and barely differ at al]
across age, gender, political affiliation, racial category,
income group, and whether or not someone is an active
investor.

There are a few notable exceptions, for example, related
to the importance of environmental issues. They are not
surprising: Democrats and Republicans disagree on the
importance of the environment versus customers. While
the young assign greater importance to the environment,
retirees (who are more likely to be shareholders) care more
about shareholders.

What do these results mean for managers who want
their organizations to be judged as just? First, while other
stakeholders certainly matter, prioritize the workers. To

start make sure they are paid well. But also make sure

40


——

guRE 3-2
—

references by segment

ated probability that a random respondent would rank a category of corporate behavior

Jorg important, by stakeholder and demographic.
;mo
Stakeholder category
Communities Environment
Workers Customers Shareholders
mm

Year: 2022 —— 44%

NS NESS

ver 20 OO 39

-
20202000200200000020002000200nSs0nS02AN04000A00n002n0020002n00AG040004002000000200000n92000090408G
"EE ed
eee"

Black* -—— 48
Hispanic —— 45

White —— 44

“eer ee ee ee
ETT EE errr
S0LT0védavnevrseererdversvdeveedvenvrneuveret

TT ee ee el
eee. vr.

Republican —— 40

Democrat —— 46

investors

8: JUST Capital’s 2021 and 2022 surveys

(ees


Benjamin, Heffetz, and Weinstein

their health and safety are protected, they can advance
in their careers, and they can pursue work-life balance
Second, if you think your constituency feels differently
think again. On the importance of workers, opinions are
remarkably similar across the demographic and Politica]
spectrum.

But there is also another, bigger lesson. There are many
efforts now underway to rate companies’ ESG, sustaip-
ability, or whatever has become the most recent buzzword.
But how companies rank relative to each other hinges on
how the various underlying issues are weighted. Most
ranking systems use weights that are arbitrary, or weights
chosen by experts—but experts often disagree, for example

because they give undue weight to what they each happen
to be an expert on.

We believe that JUST's unique approach to prioritiz-

ing issues and ranking companies based on public opin-
ion should be a model for others to follow. While there
are many subjective components to judging justness, the
judgments of the public are empirically measurable, rel-
evant to managers, and a basis for public legitimacy. As
the results suggest, the public’s judgments may be more
homogeneous and stable than you'd think—making it

easier for managers to prioritize corporate behaviors than
they may anticipate.

42


The ESG Issues That Matter Most to People

Research into the way individuals define and assess just-
ness 1N corporate behavior has lessons for companies

interested in prioritizing ESG issues:

v When evaluating American firms, the public
places a significant emphasis on the treatment of
workers. This priority remains consistent across
demographic and political groups, making it a
crucial factor for managers aiming to improve
their firms’ ESG performance.

Y Worker-related issues consistently ranked highest
in the data. Approximately 44% of respondents
deem worker-related issues as most important,
compared to other stakeholder categories.

/ Prioritizing fair wages, health and safety, career
advancement, and work-life balance for workers is

essential.

/ If youre looking to discover what matters most to
your people when it comes to ESG, take a surpris-

ingly underused approach: Just ask them.

Adapted from “Research: The ESG Issues That Matter Most to People,” on hbr.org,
July 18, 2023 (product #HO7NNS).

43


Section 2

LIVING INTO ESG

Eccles, Shandal, Young, and Montgomery

inside conglomerates or poorly managed private compa.
nies, such as dysfunctional family-run businesses. But a].
though the G in “environmental, social, and governance”
has been important in the PE industry from the outset, the
E and the S have been virtually nonexistent. The industry
has been content to seek returns with little concern for the
long-term sustainability of portfolio companies or their
wider impact on society.

A huge opportunity for private equity—and for
society—now exists. PE has moved far beyond its Wal]
Street niche to become a major player in the global
economy. In 2021 the industry had $6.3 trillion in assets
under management (compared with about $90 trillion
for public equities) and close to $2 trillion in “dry pow-
der’ (funds raised but not yet invested). Those assets are

projected to exceed $11 trillion by 2026. Roughly 10,000
PE firms worldwide oversee more than 20 million em-
ployees at about 40,000 portfolio companies. Some of the
largest PE firms—Apollo, Blackstone, Carlyle, EQT Part-
ners, KKR, and TPG—are now publicly listed themselves
and therefore subject to the same pressures that all public
companies face.

Because the industry is now so large, society wont be


Private Equity Should Take the Lead in Sustainability

lenges are addressed, the PE industry, along with all other
economic activity, will fail to thrive.

To better understand ESG’s impact on PE and the op-
portunities and challenges facing the industry, we inter-
viewed 100 people across the globe. They included industry
experts and individuals from 22 limited partners (LPs)—
the pension funds, insurance companies, sovereign wealth
funds, endowments, and wealthy families and individu-
als whose money firms use to make investments—and
from 39 general partners (GPs), which manage and invest
money for LPs. (Disclosures: One of us, Robert, serves as
the chair of KKR’s Sustainability Expert Advisory Coun-
cil. Vinay, David, and Bénédicte are consultants to the in-

dustry, including to several firms at which we conducted
interviews for this article.)

We found that members of the industry have been slow
to realize the importance of ESG for its future relevance,
profitability, and even license to operate. The immediate
challenges that PE faces are numerous and substantial: job
losses at portfolio companies, the location of funds in tax
havens, investments in private prisons and other contro-
versial industries, the purchase of oil and gas assets from
publicly listed companies (especially without a credible
plan to improve their sustainability performance), dona-
tions to far-right organizations, and substantial payouts—
sometimes hundreds of millions of dollars—for senior

49


Fecles, Shandal, Young, and Montgomery

partners and other employees at a time when income
inequality is a major societal challenge. But we also learn. 4
why the industry is well-placed to take the lead in sustain.
able investing—and how it can accelerate an adoption of

ESG principles.

Why PE Now

Private equity’s business model gives it clear advantages
over investors in public equities when it comes to imple-
menting a sustainability agenda. A PE firm has virtual
control of its portfolio companies from an ownership and
governance perspective, even when it doesn’t own 100%
of a company: It has one or more representatives on the
board and a strong influence on who else serves. It has
access to any information it wants about both financial
and sustainability performance—whereas investors in
public companies see only what the company reports. Fi-
nally, the firm determines executive compensation and
can fire a CEO who is not delivering. “Our investment
model—whereby we are often in control of ownership po-
sitions and have a long-term perspective—and our exper-
tise can help our portfolio companies advance their ESG

journeys,’ says Elizabeth Lewis, the deputy head of ESG
at Blackstone.

30


Private Equity Should Take the Lead in Sustainability

PE-owned companies operate on a longer time horizon

than publicly traded companies do, further facilitating a
focus on ESG. The average holding period for portfolio
companies has increased from about two years in the in-
dustry’s early days to about five today, which gives a GP
and its handpicked CEOs ample time to make invest-
ments without the glare of quarterly earnings calls.

Of course, private-equity firms aren't likely to integrate
ESG into their management unless they feel it’s in the
interest of long-term profitability—which is why they ve
largely ignored it until recently. But signs suggest that this
mindset is quickly changing. Principles for Responsible
Investment (PRI) reports that the number of PE and ven-
ture capital managers among signatories to the network
has quadrupled over the past five years, for a total of 1,090
today. Nine of the top 10 GPs globally are now members of
PRI. Of the world’s 100 largest PE firms, 70 are based in the
United States. Twenty-eight of those are PRI signatories,
and 13 have signed on in the past two years—evidence of
how quickly the industry is evolving.

Three forces are pushing ESG in the industry. First,
ESG is becoming more important to limited partners
and their beneficiaries. The largest asset owners—among
them pension and sovereign wealth funds—are increas-

ingly concerned about the system-level effects of cli-

mate change and inequality. A recent survey of LPs by


to evaluating th
are helping them improve their ESG capabilities.

For example, the Dutch pension investor APG has aboy
$36 billion ‘nvested with 75 GPs across the globe. Starting

2016, APG put processes in place to draw greater at
tention to sustainability from its GPs. Every year it scores
each GP ona scale of zero to 100 using a framework of 30
questions. No minimum score IS required of a new GP but
all must report annually on what they are doing and show
progress. Failure to do so will put future fund allocations
at risk, however attractive a GP's financial returns may

be. APG also gets yearly reports on the key performance
indicators for ESG issues that are material to each of the

GP’s portfolio companies.
Another Dutch pension fund, PGGM, publishes an an-
nual report on PE responsible investment. It uses a 1-to->
scale to evaluate GPs. The fund won't allocate capital to
those getting a 1 rating but will do so for those getting
a 2 if it has reason to think they Il improve. Throughout
the year, PGGM monitors the approaches of its GPs and
engages with them on ESG issues. The distribution of
scores vividly illustrates how PGGM ss general partner

32


Private Equity Should Take the Lead in Sustainability

have improved on ESG: In 2016 13% were rated very low
or low, and 16% were rated high. In 2020 those percent-

ages were 3% and 37%, respectively.
The rise of coinvesting, whereby an LP makes a direct

investment in a portfolio company alongside the GP, is

increasing pressure on GPs to focus on ESG. Coinvest-
ing gives the LP direct access to the ESG performance
data of portfolio companies. The Institutional Limited
Partners Association has published an ESG assessment
framework to help LPs evaluate and build the capabilities
of their GPs.

The second force pushing ESG in the industry de-
rives from the belief of many LPs and GPs that it will
be essential if private equity is to continue delivering its
historically high returns. The work of Harvard Business
School’s George Serafeim and others has shown that at-
tention to ESG can lead to outperformance in public mar-
kets. LPs such as CalPERS, the largest U.S. pension fund,
and Nuveen, a subsidiary of TIAA, believe that ESG is as

relevant to private equity as it is to public equities. “ESG

is important for all asset classes, says Amy O’Brien, the
global head of responsible investing at Nuveen. “ESG is
agnostic to ownership structure.

The third force is portfolio companies increasing rec-

ognition of the importance of ESG issues. The reasons

are unsurprising: a changing zeitgeist reflected in the

53


Eccles, Shandal, Young, and Montgomery

preferences of employees and customers; growing Wate
ness of the significance of climate change; social expecta
tions regarding diversity, equity, and inclusion: Pressure
from large public companies to which the portfolio compa.
nies are suppliers; awareness of the sustainability focus in

publicly listed companies; opportunities to boost their own
value through sustainability; and increasing regulation,

The confluence of those three forces has had a power.
ful, albeit somewhat counterintuitive, effect. Many of the
GP representatives we talked to, especially those who
were sophisticated about ESG, said that a commitment
to sustainability was a selling point and a differentiator
in their negotiations with potential portfolio companies
that are being targeted by multiple GPs.

What Distinguishes the Leaders in ESG?

Until recently, ESG in private equity was a box-ticking
exercise at best. LPs would give GPs a form—called an
ESG due diligence questionnaire—to fill out when a new
fund was being raised. The form was unique to each GP
and often long, and it rarely had any effect on whether
the LP invested in the fund. It was simply filed away, and

everyone got on with the business of investing and mak-
ing money.

54


Private Equity Should Take the Lead in Sustainability

Ihis approach still exists among less sophisticated
GPs and LPs. But according to Giovanni Orsi, the head
managing director of relationships and partnerships and
private equity at the Canadian pension fund PSP Invest-
ments, "Five years ago there were clear leaders, with lag-
gards significantly behind. Today the gap is narrowing.

What are the leaders in ESG doing differently? They
are becoming more sophisticated in three ways: (1) inte-
grating ESG factors in due diligence, onboarding, holding
periods, and exit strategies; (2) increasing transparency In
the reporting of sustainability performance; and (3) as-
sessing and improving the ESG capabilities of portfolio

companies.

Integrating ESG

Each target or portfolio company’s performance is as-
sessed on the critical ESG issues that will affect value
creation. That means moving from a short ‘risk and

compliance” checklist in the due diligence phase (to

screen out any obvious problems that could have finan-
cial consequences) to a sophisticated analysis of how
well a portfolio company understands and is managing
the ESG issues material to its business. That analysis is

followed by collaboration with the company's board (on

90


Eccles, Shandal, Young, and Montgomery

which the GP always has a seat) and with Managemen,
to improve its performance (often with substantia] hel

from the GP). | |
Leading GPs are continually improving the integration

of ESG considerations into portfolio-company Manage.
ment. For example, in addition to monitoring and man.
aging ESG risks during the holding period, Apollo Global]
Management is experimenting with a post-exit analysis of
investments to determine how ESG issues affected perfor.
mance and how the firm might apply that knowledge to
future investments. “We are developing a template to help
us assess ESG performance over the lifetime of an invest.
ment, and we will continue to evolve our approach,”
Laurie Medley, Apollo's global head of ESG.

Until recently, the separation in PE between those
making investment decisions, those overseeing an asset
once the deal was done, and those responsible for sus-
tainability was clear. At some firms it is becoming less
pronounced as deal teams undertake training in ESG.
For example, Investindustrial, a firm with $12 billion
in assets under management, sends its deal teams and
portfolio-company managers to a sustainability certifi-
cation course at New York University. They are supported
by in-house experts in environmental and social issues.
Apollo, Ares Capital, Bain Capital, Carlyle, EQT, Gen-
eration Investment Management, IG4 Capital, Investin-

Says

36


Private Equity Should Take the Lead in Sustainability

dustrial, KKR, PAI Partners, TowerBrook, and Verdane
all told us that they are creating a process to make deal

teams more knowledgeable about ESG.

increasing transparency

With the growing recognition that ESG performance
contributes to financial performance, GPs have become
much more disciplined about gathering ESG data. They
often collect a standard set of key performance indica-

tors from their portfolio companies on an annual or even
a quarterly basis. In some cases, the number of KPls

ranges from 50 to 100. KPI reporting now almost always
includes the ESG issues that are material to a company s

financial performance. (For example, water usage is more

relevant to a food and beverage company than to a bank
or a tech company.) Triton, with $15.6 billion in assets

under management, has, since 2014, had a reporting sys-
tem based on “three Ps”: policy (what it is doing on the

ESG front), program (its plan to implement the policy),

and performance (how well the program is being im-
plemented at the portfolio-company level). It uses vari-
ous resources, including the Sustainability Accounting

Standards Board, to identify material ESG issues when

screening for investments and when managing them.

o/


Fecles, Shandal, Young, and Montgomery

Transparency between GPs and their LPs is also increas.
ing. Apollo has been reporting on ESG to LPs for 12 years
and in recent years its annual ESG report has been Publicty
available on its website—a practice some other GPs have
now adopted. Some LPs are requesting ESG data, such a.
for carbon, at the portfolio-company level.

Improving ESG performance

The private-equity business model puts general part.

ners in a good position to help portfolio companies
improve their ESG integration and reporting practices

in a number of ways. These include identifying relevant
issues and best practices for dealing with them, provid-
ing measurement and reporting tools, benchmarking
against other portfolio companies, offering access to in-
ternal and external experts, and monitoring regulatory
developments.

some GPs have developed methodologies for assessing
the degree of ESG sophistication in potential portfolio
companies and helping them improve practice. Car-
lyle’s process for evaluating targets starts with risk (basic
compliance on environmental, safety, and health issues),
moves to value (captured from the company's current
business model and capabilities), and ends with growth

98


Private Equity Should Take the Lead in Sustainability

(how to enter new areas). Its resources can enable port-
folio companies to improve on sustainability faster than
they could on their own.

Graeme Ardus, the head of ESG at Triton, told us that
“deal teams and portfolio companies can see how each
business is doing in comparison to the “Triton bench-
mark.” The firm holds monthly calls to share good prac-
tices with its portfolio companies and hosts events where
CEOs and other senior executives present what they are
doing on ESG. Triton also has a formal annual ESG gath-
ering at which companies can network with and learn

from one another.
Another leader where we interviewed is Nuveen, which

acts as both a GP and an LP. In its role as an LP, it has
a framework for doing an ESG assessment of every gen-
eral partner and every fund in which it invests. Nuveen
also gathers ESG data at both the fund and the portfolio-
company level, including carbon footprint and alignment
of each investment with the UN’s Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals—among them ending poverty and promot-
ing responsible consumption and production. It then uses
those capabilities in its engagements with private compa-
nies. “The challenge for many private companies, O Brien
says, “is the lack of capacity and resources to work on ESG

integration and reporting. We are almost like consultants

for the company.

59


Eccles, Shandal, Young, and Montgomery

To spur learning, Investindustrial has, for five Years
held an annual sustainability meeting with its Portfolio
companies. Attendance is a good indicator of how intereg
in sustainability has grown in the PE sector. “In the first
year the company typically sent only one Person—whoeye,
was most closely associated with sustainability,” Says Serge
Younes, Investindustrial's head of sustainability. *At Our
last virtual meeting we had more than 200 people from 25
portfolio companies, including many members of senior
management, such as the CEO and the CFO.”

What Comes Next?

Although our interviews revealed that the private-equity

industry is taking (long overdue) steps to adopt a sus-
tainability agenda, considerable room for improvement
remains. Here are four initiatives that can be helpful.

standardize ESG reporting


Private Equity Should Take the Lead in Sustainability

cators (KPIs) and a methodology for collecting, analyz-
ing, and reporting data, and all agreed that some degree
of standardization would be useful. Portfolio companies
with multiple GPs face multiple data requests. Similarly,
GPs receive wide-ranging and differing data requests
from their LPs.

Solid progress is already being made on this front, start-
ing with the ESG Data Convergence Project, led by Cal-
PERS and Carlyle (and to which BCG was an adviser). They
brought together a group of leading LPs and GPs to agree
on six ESG issues—Scopes 1 and 2 greenhouse gas emis-
sions, renewable energy, board diversity, work-related in-
juries, net new hires, and employee engagement—and the
KPIs for each, all based on existing standards and frame-
works. GPs participating in the project agree to collect
data from their portfolio companies and make it avail-
able to their LPs. The data will then be anonymized and
put into a database for benchmarking purposes. As of this
writing, the project includes a group of 100 global GPs
and LPs representing $8.7 trillion in assets under man-

agement and 1,400 portfolio companies.
The project’s leaders anticipated that getting agree-

ment between GPs and LPs would be extremely difficult

because people have unique data needs, and no regula-
tions currently exist to enforce standards. But the rapid

uptake of the ESG Data Convergence Project indicates

bl


Fecles, Shandal, Young, and Montgomery

that the industry is ready to meet this challenge ina More
aligned way. (That said, nothing prevents a GP or an Lp
from requesting additional data.) Other groups are work.
ing on a similar idea, including PRI, the Ceres Investor
Network, the Institutional Investors Group on Climate
Change, and the Initiative Climat Internationa] (iC]),

The Institutional Limited Partners Association js work.
ing to ensure alignment rather than competition among
these initiatives.

Make net-zero commitments

Given the size of this asset class, the PE industry needs

to make the kind of commitment to “net zero by 2050”
that all financial institutions under the umbrella of
the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero are making.
Important work for private equity is being done by the
ICI, which was launched in 2015 by five French PE firms
to help achieve the objectives of the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change. Thanks in large part to support from
PRI, the iCI now includes more than 164 general partners
representing more than $2 trillion In assets under man-
agement. In March 2022 Elizabeth Seeger, the manag-
ing director of sustainable investing at KKR, was named
chair of the North American chapter. The iCI’s members

62


Private Equity Should Take the Lead in Sustainability

commit to reducing carbon emissions in their portfolio
companies and seek to ensure long-term sustainable fi-
nancial performance by managing the risks and oppor-
tunities presented by climate change. However, there is a
major difference between reducing emissions in a port-
folio (where a GP may simply ditch dirty companies) and
reducing emissions in a portfolio company (which a GP

may help go green).

Improve diversity

The industry needs to improve its track record with di-
versity, equity, and inclusion (DEI). Today, private equity
is still predominantly white and male, particularly on
deal teams. Evidence continues to mount that a more di-
verse workforce leads to better performance. Diversity is
also important in the war for talent. Hence it has become
a top issue for limited partners in managing their invest-
ments (and themselves), and they are putting pressure on
their GPs. Encouragingly, some GPs already recognize
the importance of DEI. EQT, for example, is committed
to creating truly diverse, gender-balanced (at least 40%
female) investment-professional teams. To demonstrate
the seriousness of its commitment, EQT has issued a

credit instrument whereby its interest rate will ratchet up

63


Eccles, Shandal, Young, and Montgomery

if EQT fails to meet the short-term target of 28% female
by 2026. Other firms should follow its lead.

DEI standards must apply to portfolio companies
as well. Sherrie Trecker, the sustainability officer at the

Washington State Investment Board, says, “GPs have the
ability to change board structures quickly. This is impact-
ful, and I think we will see rapid change here, especially
compared with public equities.” Kara Helander, the chief
diversity, equity, and inclusion officer at Carlyle, says,
"Ten years ago there was less focus on this, but today
DEI is a business priority for our portfolio companies.”
Carlyle has a goal of at least 30% diverse board member-

ship for its controlled portfolio companies. Since many

of those board members are Carlyle employees, the firm
understands its obligation to improve its own diversity.
Carlyles CEO, Kewsong Lee, leads the DEI initiative and,
along with other Carlyle executives, sets the tone from the
top by holding all Carlyle colleagues accountable through
DEI objective setting and by hosting discussions on miti-
gating unconscious bias.

Spread the wealth

The PE industry needs to directly confront the fact that
the tremendous wealth it has created has been unevenly

64


Private Equity Should Take the Lead in Sustainability

distributed. LPs, GPs, and the top executives of portfo-
lio companies have benefited to a much greater degree
than other employees of those companies. Shared owner-
ship, whereby all company employees participate in the
value created during the holding period, is important.
Take TowerBrook s 2020 investment in CarTrawler, a com-
pany providing technology solutions to the global travel
industry. All 400 or so employees have received shares
that will allow them to garner proceeds when they depart.
Similarly, in a number of its investments, KKR offers sub-
stantial ownership to employees outside the C-suite and
provides them with basic financial education.
Demonstrating a broader industry commitment to
spreading the wealth, 19 PE firms have mobilized a
group of asset managers, financial services firms, foun-
dations, and nonprofits to launch the nonprofit Owner-
ship Works. Its mission is “to increase prosperity through
shared ownership at work.” It has set an ambitious target
of generating at least $20 billion by 2030 for hundreds
of thousands of new employee-owners—among them
lower-income workers and people of color who have been
excluded from this wealth-building opportunity for gen-
erations. According to Anna-Lisa Miller, the executive
director, “This movement is about working in concert to

create a future... where employers and employees can

win together.”


Eccles, Shandal, Young, and Montgomery

To be sure, shared ownership doesn't work for al] RE
panies. In the retail sector, for example, where turnowe
is high, it would be an ineffective way to incentivize ang

reward employee performance.

Important elements—including social pressure, LP pres.
sure, and shareholder pressure on publicly listed PE
firms—are pushing private equity to take the lead in
ESG integration. But will that be enough? PE firms must
commit to moving their involvement in ESG from box-
ticking to the center of their reason for being. Despite the
best of intentions, it is all too easy for the industry to get
lost in the weeds of the ESG agenda and forget that its
social license to operate is not guaranteed.

To be successful in the future, PE leaders must speak
openly and often about the importance of sustainable
value creation. They must recruit people who care about
it in the broadest sense and aren’t joining the industry just
because it can be very lucrative. We foresee three conse-
quences if the industry fails to fully embrace ESG: Its s0-
cial legitimacy will increasingly come under attack. It will
no longer be able to deliver its historically high return»
And it will fail to fulfill its potential to help solve, rather

than exacerbate, environmental, social, and governan
problems.

66


Private Equity Should Take the Lead in Sustainability

Most private equity firms attempt to improve the per-
formance of their portfolio companies through better
corporate governance. But while the G in ESG has al-
ways been important in the industry, the E and the S have
been virtually nonexistent. Private equity can emerge as
a leader in ESG—to benefit the wider world as well as its
own long-term performance—by doing the following:

Y Integrate ESG factors in your due diligence efforts,
onboarding processes, holding periods, and exit
strategies.

/ Increase transparency in the reporting of sustain-
ability performance.

Y Assess and improve the ESG capabilities of portfo-

lio companies.

/ Make continued improvements by standardizing
ESG reporting, making net-zero commitments,
improving diversity, and spreading the wealth.

Adapted from an article in Harvard Business Review, July-August 2022 (product
#R2204E),

67

ENSURE THAT YOUR
JOINT VENTURES MEET
YOUR ESG GOALS

by James Bamford, Shishir Bhargava,
Neetin Gulati, Tracy Pyle, and Joshua Kwicinski

ompanies are under intense pressure to improve their

ESG performance. To date, the lion's share of man-

agement scrutiny and investor activism has focused
on wholly owned or controlled entities.

But this worldview contains a sizable flaw. Many com-
panies hold large and growing portfolios of joint ventures
(J Vs), many of which are equally owned or noncontrolled

entities. These ventures often materially contribute to a

69


Bamford, Bhargava, Gulati, Pyle, and Kwicinsk

firm’s actual ESG profile and risks. And yet such vep.
tures have been widely omitted from company reporting
and commitments related to safety, emissions, human
rights, community engagement, and other ESG-relateq
parameters.

Pressure is building for this to change, quickly. Com-
panies will need to act, as investors, regulators, and other
external stakeholders are beginning to turn their gaze to

JVs as an asset class.

Increasing Scrutiny on JVs and ESG

Many companies hold interests in scores of joint ven-

tures. Global energy companies like Shell, ExxonMobil,
BP, and TotalEnergies have economic interests in hun-

dreds of JVs around the world, more than half of which
they often do not operate. In mining, JVs account for
more than 40% of the current production at the 10 larg-
est mines in the world for numerous commodities, in-
cluding bauxite, coal, cobalt, copper, diamonds, gold,
lithium, and nickel. Outside natural resources, Siemens

has more than 100 joint ventures, SABIC is a partner in

Disclosure: The authors have advised a number of companies mentioned in
this piece.

10


Ensure That Your Joint Ventures Meet Your ESG Goals

more than 40 JVs, and Lockheed Martin, Nestlé, and
Walt Disney hold a dozen or more such ventures. For
many companies, JVs employ thousands of people, gen-
erate significant direct and indirect carbon emissions
and, especially for ventures operating in less developed
countries, introduce significant human rights risks.

External stakeholders are waking up to the reality that
most noncontrolled JVs have been excluded from ESG
reporting. For instance, the Environmental Defense Fund
and Rockefeller Asset Management sounded an alarm
that most international energy companies fail to report
methane emissions from their noncontrolled JVs, creat-
ing an emission omission.” This gap will be partly ad-
dressed by the International Sustainability Standards
Board sustainability disclosure standards that were re-
leased in June 2023 and have started to be incorporated
into regulatory frameworks in multiple jurisdictions
around the world. In 2022, our analysis of 30 large public
companies in the energy, mining, and chemicals sectors
showed that less than 20% provide any ESG reporting
with regard to their noncontrolled ventures. And when
companies do provide reporting, it's often spotty, cover-
ing a single ESG metric.

In Europe, regulators have adopted mandatory human
rights and environmental due diligence rules that will

apply to a company’s own operations, as well as its

3


Ramford, Bhargava, Gulati, Pyle, and Kwicinsk

established business relationships, likely including a firnys
JVs. Meanwhile, Human Rights Watch and other advocacy
groups are paying more attention to the human rights
performance of JVs, holding noncontrolling partners to
account for violations and pressing these firms to elevate
their games. Demands for greater transparency on othe;
ESG topics are likely to follow.

Companies also need to live up to their own commit.
ments. Most public companies have published codes of
conduct that define their fundamental operating princi-
ples. These codes often include self-imposed obligations
to encourage the company’s joint ventures, minority
investments, suppliers, and business partners to adopt
similar principles and standards. If companies are not,
in fact, engaging with their JVs and partners to ensure
responsible practices with respect to safety, environment,

human rights, and local communities, they are violating
their own codes of conduct.

Three Levers to Pull

Companies that are serious about elevating ESG perfor-
mance across their JVs have three primary levers to pull:

partner due diligence, contractual rights and protections,

and post-close governance and management practices

12


Ensure That Your Joint Ventures Meet Your ESG Goals

Effectively pulling each lever will demand companies
to make important changes to their traditional ways of

doing business.

Partner due diligence

Done well, partner due diligence informs whether and
how to enter into a JV. Such diligence drives firms to
avoid new JVs with intolerable ESG risks or to structure
the transaction in ways that strongly mitigate those risks.
This requires companies to embrace fuller environmen-
tal impact assessments and deeper investigations of past
human rights abuses, local community disputes, treat-
ment of migrant and contract workers, conflicting land
claims, and the human rights records of relevant secu-
rity forces, paramilitaries, and law enforcement—and to
demonstrate a willingness to walk away based on what

they find.

Contractual terms

Contractual terms can protect both the company en-
tering into the JV and the rights of people working
for or living near it. But our analysis of more than 80

13


Bamford, Bhargava, Gulati, Pyle, and Kwicinsk

IV legal agreements from the oil and gas, mining, ang
chemical sectors shows that most agreements Provide
very few rights or protections for noncontrolling part.
ners on environmental, human rights, and Community
engagement matters. For instance, among Mining in-
dustry JVs, we found that only 29% of the agreements
included any provisions that explicitly referenced either
human rights or community engagement—and those
that did rarely addressed the topic in depth. There are
also serious gaps regarding environmental provisions
as agreements rarely establish explicit environmental
standards for JV operations, define clear restrictions on
certain types of greenhouse gas emissions, or set mini-
mum requirements for environmental performance and
risk reporting to the shareholders.

Some companies are working to address this gap. In
the mining industry, Alcoa, Anglo American, and Vale
have been reexamining their approach to JV legal agree-
ments and developing more robust corporate guidance
on what ESG-related terms they expect to see in those
agreements, especially where they are a noncontrolling
or non-managing partner. More will need to follow.

14


Ensure That Your Joint Ventures Meet Your ESG Goals

Governance

Companies will need to raise their game on JV gover-
nance. They must invest the time and resources to pro-
vide strong oversight of their JVs, ensuring appropriate
JV management team focus on strong ESG performance
and an orientation toward serving all community stake-
holders, not just shareholders.

We have found that the governance of many JVs is
deeply flawed. Our benchmarking of the governance
practices of more than 100 large JVs shows substantial
performance gaps. The median JV board director spends
only 15 days per year fulfilling their oversight roles and
serves on the board for only 30 months—far too little to
gain real understanding of the JV's operations and its
ESG performance and risks. JV boards rarely have any
directors with sustainability or other ESG-specific ex-
pertise. Similarly, JV boards spend half as much time
together in a year compared to corporate boards (20 ver-
sus 40 hours per year) and dedicate a lower percentage
of their time to strategy and other long-term topics, in-
cluding ESG, compared to corporate boards. Adjusting
the dials on these important board indicators is essential
to driving performance improvement on ESG or other

matters.

15


Bamford, Bhargava, Gulati, Pyle, and Kwicinsk

Additionally, companies need to dedicate more inter.
nal resources to drive ESG performance in their JV, For
instance, large mining companies dedicate a median team
of 2.3 full-time equivalent employees to oversee their larg.
est non-controlled JVs, which leaves little bandwidth
available to influence partners and JV management teams
to better manage environment, human rights, and com.
munity engagement. Companies in the chemicals in.
dustrials, aerospace and defense, automotive, and power
sectors have even smaller shareholder governance teams.

A number of companies are starting to bring more
rigor to the governance of their JVs, including gover-

nance of ESG. For example, BHP, Dow, and SABIC have
all established clear internal accountabilities and expec-

tations for the governance of their JVs, regularly conduct
structured governance assessments, and periodically re-
port to their corporate boards on the state of JV gover-
nance. ‘They are in the minority. Few corporate boards
even understand how many JVs their company has, let
alone how well they are governed.

It's time for more companies to take a closer look at
the ESG performance and risks across their entire enter-
prise, including J Vs and other entities in which they own
a partial interest. The world will be watching.

16


Ensure That Your Joint Ventures Meet Your SG Goals

Even as companies are becoming more transparent about
their ESG practices, most provide little information
about the impact of their joint ventures (JVs). Companies
can use three levers to work with partners to meet ESG

expectations:

/ Partner due diligence: Investigate potential partners
abuses, disputes, legal claims, and other such
records; structure the transaction in ways that
strongly mitigate those risks; or avoid JVs with
intolerable ESG risks entirely.

Y Contractual terms: Use the terms of your JV
agreements to provide rights or protections for
noncontrolling partners on environmental, human

rights, and community engagement matters.

Y Governance: Invest time and resources to pro-
vide oversight of J Vs, focusing on strong ESG
performance and an orientation toward serving all
community stakeholders, not just shareholders.

Adapted from content posted on hbr.org, June 3, 2022 (product #H072US).

1]


ALIS TESTING THE

LIMITS OF CORPORATE
GOVERNANCE

by Roberto Tallarita

ew doubt that artificial intelligence (AI) is going to

be disruptive for society, and governments are be-

ginning to devise regulatory strategies to control its
social cost. In the meantime, however, AI is being de-
veloped by private firms, run by executives, supervised
by boards of directors, and funded by investors. In other
words, what is likely to prove the most important tech-

nological innovation of our lifetime is currently overseen

79


vernance—the set of rules, mostly of pr
at allocate power and manage CONflicts
within a corporation.

The recent boardroom war at OpenAl, the clea
that developed ChatGPT, has put a spotlight on the ick
of corporate governance in AI safety. OpenA] Global

LLC, the Delaware company in which Microsoft ang
other investors have invested billions of dollars, is con.

trolled by a nonprofit, OpenAI. On November 17, 2023
the board of directors fired Open AI cofounder and CEO
Sam Altman on the grounds that “he was not consis-
tently candid ... with the board.” Investors protested,
but the board stood by its decision.

Shortly thereafter, on November 20, Microsoft an-
nounced that it had hired Altman and Greg Brockman,
another cofounder of Open AI, to continue their work on
AI development within Microsoft. Hundreds of OpenAI
employees threatened to join Microsoft as well. On
November 22, less than a week after his ousting, Sam

Altman was back as CEO of OpenAI, and all but one di-
rector of Open Al resigned.

Microsoft could not fire the board and reinstate Alt
man as CEO, but it could hire Altman and hundreds of
other employees. It could essentially “buy” OpenAI with
out paying a price to the company’s shareholders. The

legal entity OpenAI was constrained by its governant:


Al Is Testing the Limits of Corporate Governance

structure, but the knowledge developed by the company
(its main asset) could be acquired and redeployed free

from these constraints.
Such events bring questions to the fore: Can AI safety

research shed any light on old corporate governance
problems? And can the law and economics of corporate
governance help us frame the new problems of AI safety?
I identify five lessons—and one dire warning—on the
corporate governance of Al that the corporate turmoil at

OpenAI has made vivid.

1. Companies cannot rely on traditional corporate
governance to protect the social good

At least, this is what OpenAI and Anthropic, two of the
most advanced players in AI development, believed when

they were set up.
Unlike in a conventional corporation, investors cannot

hire or fire the board members, and neither the investors
nor the CEO control the board. The company charter
warns investors that Open AT's mission is “to ensure that

artificial general intelligence (AGI) . . . benefits all of hu-

manity,” and the company’s “primary fiduciary duty is to
humanity.”? In other words, that duty takes precedence

over any obligation to generate a profit.

81


Tallarita

Anthropic is organized as a public benefit COrporatign
(PBC), with the specific mission to “responsibly develop
and maintain advanced Al for the long-term benefit of
humanity.”3 In a powerful tweak to the standard ppc
structure, a common law trust with the same social 90a]
as the company is entitled to elect an increasing number
of directors over time, which will become a majority after
a certain period of time or the reaching of certain fund.
raising milestones.

Both structures are highly unusual for cutting-edge
tech companies. Their purpose is to isolate corporate gov-
ernance from the pressure of profit maximization and to
constrain the power of the CEO. If the company chooses
safety over profits, investors and executives can protest but
they cannot compel the board to make a different choice.

Compare and contrast this approach with the recent
wave of support for stakeholder governance. In 2019 the
Business Roundtable, a prominent association of CEOs
of leading companies, issued a statement in which many
of its members pledged to deliver value not only to share-
holders but also to employees, customers, and society at
large.* Similar stakeholder governance manifestos—by
the World Economic Forum, corporate governance €X
perts, and major asset managers—insist on the need for

corporations to consider social goals alongside profit
maximization.

82


Al Is Testing the Limits of Corporate Governance

But as fellow law professor Lucian Bebchuk and I have
documented, the companies that have embraced the rhe-
toric of stakeholder protection have not changed their
governance.” In fact, both the Business Roundtable and
other vocal supporters of stakeholder governance have
argued that there are no significant trade-offs between
profit maximization and social purpose.” Most of the
stakeholder governance movement is therefore predicated
on the ability of conventional corporate governance to

pursue both profits and social goals.

The governance structures of OpenAI and Anthropic
suggest otherwise. Whatever one may think of the de-
cision to fire Altman or of the effectiveness of the
governance structures of OpenAI or Anthropic, these

governance experiments teach us an important lesson: If
a company wants to get serious about social purpose and |
stakeholder welfare, it cannot rely on traditional corpo-
rate governance, but it must constrain the power of both

investors and executives.

2. Even creative governance structures will
struggle to tame the profit motive

In an influential paper, economists Oliver Hart and

Luigi Zingales argued that, in an unrestricted market for

83


fit-driven buyer can easily hijag
the social mission of a firm.’ They called this phenom
enon “amoral drift. Hart and Zingales refer to Corporate
takeovers, but something similar happened at Openay

Right or wrong, the board of OpenAI had strong non.
reasons to fire Altman, but it eventually capity.

ro
corporate control, a P

nancial
lated to profit-maximizing pressure.

But what if OpenAl could effectively stop Altman and
other employees from working for a for-profit organiza.
tion? A bit of backward induction can help us guess the
answer. Would Microsoft have invested $13 billion in
OpenAl if that capital could have been more effectively
committed to OpenAI's social goals? More generally,
would investors fund new AI startups if their socially ori-
ented governance were more effective in taming the profit
motive? And if investors could choose between investor-
friendly AI companies and socially committed AI compa-
nies, which ones would they choose?

It is easy to imagine the answers to these questions.
AI companies with more effective mechanisms to remain
committed to AI safety even at the expense of investor re-
turn might struggle to get funding. In equilibrium, this
might mean that investor-friendly companies would win
out and socially oriented companies would be wiped oul.
Perhaps it is possible to design waterproof solutions (0

84


Al Is Testing the Limits of Corporate Governance

avoid the amoral drift. So far, however, no corporate plan-

ner has come up with one.

3. Independence and social responsibility
do not necessarily converge

An important concept in AI safety is the so-called ortho-
gonality thesis, which posits that AT's intelligence and its
final goals are not necessarily correlated. We can have
unintelligent machines that serve us well and superintel-
ligent machines that harm us. Intelligence alone does not
guarantee against harmful behavior.

Corporate governance experts should borrow this help-
ful concept. Textbook corporate governance prescribes
companies to appoint independent directors, who are freer
from the influence of CEOs and are supposed to be loyal
to shareholders. But independence from management
and loyalty to shareholders are orthogonal: The former
does not necessarily result in the latter. An independent

director might well choose not to pay attention, to pursue
their own interests, or to follow some personal convic-
tions that are harmful to shareholders. We cannot pre-
sume that independent directors will automatically do

the right thing.

85


Tallarita

By the same token, we cannot presume that iNSulatio,
from investor and CEO pressure, of the kind Ought
OpenAl and Anthropic, will automatically result in å
cially desirable decisions. Directors who cannot be fired

by investors are less likely to follow investor preferen ie

but are they more likely to choose what is best for Society:

Socially oriented governance structures should not be
-ontent with independence from executives and inves.

tors. They should also set up mechanisms that encourage
directors to pursue social goals and take them to account
Corporate planners should experiment with method;
that allow outside scrutiny of board decisions, with in-
centives for socially oriented decision-making, and with
creative forms of accountability for board members.

4 Corporate governance should try to solve
for the alignment of profit and safety

One crucial problem in AI safety is the so-called “align-
ment problem”: Superintelligent AI might have values
and goals that are incompatible with human well-being.
This sounds like a science fiction fantasy, but the consen-
sus among AI researchers is that human-level Al 1s im-

minent, and the alignment problem is real.”


Alls Testing the Limits of Corporate Governance

We can program a superintelligent AI to pursue so-
cially desirable goals, but we cannot exclude that, in pur-
suing those terminal goals, the AI will decide to pursue
harmful instrumental goals. The problem is that we do not
yet know how to teach AI to behave in a way that is al-
ways compatible with human values. We can list dozens
or hundreds of human-compatible behaviors, but this list
will never be exhaustive.

The AI alignment problem is quite similar to the cen-
tral problem of corporate governance. In a corporation,
investors entrust their money to corporate managers, and
they want to make sure that managers do what is best for
investors. Investors can write down some rules, but just
like AI programmers, they cannot specify all the possible

rules applicable to all the possible situations. The contract

with the managers is, as economists like to say, an in-
complete contract.

Corporate governance tries hard to solve this problem.
Companies give managers incentives, like stock options,
that align their interests with the interests of investors.
They appoint independent directors. They disclose ma-
terial information so that investors can monitor how
companies are run. They give investors voting rights and
other control devices so that they can step in when nec-
essary and remove unfaithful managers.

87


Tallarita

The whole machinery of corporate law and govern,
Nice

reoccupied with what experts call the Manager
la

is p
agency problem”: how to reduce the risk that Manag
CTs

deviate from the preferences of investors. It does not sok
the problem entirely, but it considerably alleviates it.

What OpenAls and Anthropic's alternative gover
nance structures do is to try to protect AI safety from the
profit-seeking drive of managers and investors. But, .,
we have seen, the profit motive is a powerful force, which
can find ways to upset governance designs.

An alternative route is to try to make Al safety profit

able. The best hope for the private governance of A] Safety
(if such a thing is achievable at all) is to strike an alliance

with the profit motive.
This is easier said than done. However, the history of

liberal societies suggests that investing more talent and
energy in this inquiry is worthwhile. Our most suc-

cessful institutional designs, from liberal constitutions
to capitalist institutions, do not depend on suppressing
greed and ambition. Instead, they focus on harnessing
these passions for the greater good.

The alignment of profit and safety is perhaps as hard a
problem to solve as the alignment of AI and human values,
but among the possible strategies for the corporate gover
nance of AI, it has the largest potential upside. More cre

ative experiments should focus on this project.


Al Is Testing the Limits of Corporate Governance

5 Al companies boards must maintain a
delicate balance in cognitive distance

AI safety is a niche field. While many businesspeople are
now learning about AI and some of its risks, the real Vo
perts are often outsiders with little or no experience in
the corporate world. |

More importantly, AI safety experts and mainstream
businesspeople often have very different npiapolennes
backgrounds, and beliefs about how fast - will develop
and how dangerous it could be. What is a highly probable
and imminent development to many AI safety experts,

such as human-level or superintelligent AI, is a wild spec-
ulation to many outsiders; what is a small but concrete risk

to many AI safety experts, such as an passet AI,
is a nonsensical sci-fi fantasy to many outsiders.

This difference between how AI safety te and
outsiders interpret and understand the world is cam
some scholars have termed cognitive mensen Cogritiye
distance may be beneficial to collective NE
especially in innovative firms. Indeed, to develop å
knowledge, decision-makers must be exposed to new ideas
and points of view. pe |

But finding the optimal degree of cognitive istanes ;
hard. Too little cognitive distance may result in groupthin


Tallarita

and echo chambers; too much may prevent mutual Un.

derstanding and any kind of meaningful cooperation
Was the drastic and sudden decision to fire Altman

with little or no warning to major investors and no oy
planations to the public, the product of too little Cogni.
tive distance? Open AI's board members, beyond Altman
and Brockman, were the companys chief scientist. an
academic Al safety expert, a RAND Corporation scien.
tist focused on AI governance, and a tech CEO. It ig Dos-
sible that their beliefs on AT safety were strongly aligned,
and that their decision-making process did not benef
from outside and discordant points of view. Likely, they
did not have to convince any outsiders that firing the CEQ
was the right thing to do.

But can Al companies social mission be effectively
pursued if board members do not have a strong safety
mindset or intuitively reject the bleakest scenarios? The
makeup of the interim board of OpenAI is now more
aligned with the business establishment. It has no Al
“geeks,” and it includes former treasury secretary and

Harvard president Larry Summers and big-tech veteran
Bret Taylor.

It is possible that, on the new board, the level of cog:
nitive distance has remained unchanged, but the shared

beliefs have simply become more mainstream. In other

90


Al Is Testing the Limits of Corporate Governance

words, while the previous board might have been cohe-
sive in sharing the AI safety experts’ beliefs on the risks of
human-level AI, the new board might be equally cohesive

in sharing a more conventional business view of the world.
In both setups, the cognitive distance in the boardroom

might be too little.
Corporate boards are complex social systems. The

‘deal decision-making dynamic in the boardroom should
be one in which directors with different backgrounds,
competences, and points of view discuss vigorously and
intelligently, willing to contribute their insights but also
to learn and change their minds when appropriate. Real-

world boardrooms often fail to live up to this standard.
Considering the significant risks associated with Al

safety and the substantial differences in viewpoints and
expertise, board composition in AI companies should
become a top priority. These companies should strive
for greater cognitive distance than more conventional
companies, and their boardroom norms should aggres-
sively reward time commitment and robust, open-minded
discussion. Though often underrated in discussions of
corporate governance, boardroom social and cognitive
dynamics are crucial. If there is any business sector where
this should become a central concern, it is unquestionably

in AI development.

9]


Tallarita

A warning: Corporate governance cannot handle
catastrophic risk

Many risks posed by AT are serious but not fatal. Job gi.
placement, misinformation, rise of online scams, Copy-

right infringement, and privacy concerns might proye
seriously harmful, but they will not irreparably damage

our civilization.

Many AI experts, however, believe that there is .
small but nonnegligible chance that AI will be cata-
strophic for humanity. In a 2022 survey of AI experts,
the median respondent said that the probability that
AI will lead to “something extremely bad, for example,
human extinction” is 5%.’ Almost half of the respon-
dents (48%) gave at least 10% chance of a disastrous
outcome.

While corporate governance might help mitigate se-
rious risks, it is not good at handling existential risk,
even when corporate decision-makers have the stron-
gest commitment to the common good. To understand
why, we should go back to the problem of incomplete
contracts,

An incomplete contract is a contract that does not

contain rules for all possible future scenarios. All real-

92


Al Is Testing the Limits of Corporate Governance

world contracts are incomplete, and firms often accept
this problem as an inevitable cost of doing business.

When the costs of incompleteness are too high, however,
firms can choose another strategy: They can integrate their
contractual counterparty within their own organization.
This way, the firm will retain the “residual rights of con-
trol” over the relevant assets and can therefore regulate un-
expected situations if and when they occur."

Consider a contract between a carmaker and a supplier
of auto parts. The contract will specify the obligations of
the supplier under many but not all circumstances. What
happens in an unregulated circumstance? The supplier is

free to refuse an order and the carmaker might not get

the auto parts it wants.
To avoid this problem, the carmaker can acquire the

supplier and integrate it within the company. This means
that in an unregulated circumstance, the carmaker can
still get the auto parts if it wants to.

Now translate this problem to AI safety. In this set-
ting, the residual rights of control are the ability of the Al
company to turn off the machine. In any unexpected cir-
cumstances, when the AI is behaving in harmful ways,
the AI company can decide that the risks are greater than
the benefits and pull the plug. A corporate governance

system geared toward AI safety can do precisely that.

93


Tallarita

But what happens if the AI becomes uncontrollable:
In that scenario, the residual rights of control are of little
help. As anyone who has watched a few sci-f Movie
knows, the “owner” of the rogue AI cannot turn off the
machine that easily.

When it comes to catastrophic risks, our legal system

typically gives up on ordinary legal controls—such as
property rights, contracts, or lawsuits—and focuses on
extraordinary legal controls, of the kind used to regu-

late nuclear proliferation or biohazard. The pursuit of A]
safety warrants this kind of extraordinary effort.

Top AI experts and commentators have already
invoked a Manhattan Project for AI, in which the US
government would mobilize thousands of scientists and

private actors, fund research that would be uneconomic
for business firms, and make safety an absolute prior-
ity. Even the most creative corporate governance inno-
vations cannot be a long-term substitute for the public
governance of catastrophic risks. While good corporate
s°vernance can help in the transitional phase, the gov-
ernment should quickly recognize its inevitable role in
Al safety and step up to the historic task.

94


Alls Testing the Limits of Corporate Governance

Can questions around AI safety and governance shed
any light on old corporate governance problems? And
can the law and economics of corporate governance help
us frame the new problems of AI safety? The events sur-
rounding the boardroom turmoil at OpenAI reveal five
lessons—and one warning—on the corporate governance

of socially sensitive technologies:

/ Companies cannot rely on traditional corporate

governance to protect the social good.

/ Even creative governance structures will struggle

to tame the profit motive.

/ Independence and social responsibility do not

necessarily converge.

/ Corporate governance should try to solve for the

alignment of profit and safety.

/ Alcompanies’ boards must maintain a delicate

balance in cognitive distance.

95


Tallarita

the emergence of AI carries unlikely byt å
n-

/ Still
gible extreme risks for humanity; even the

negli
most creative corporate governance innovations

cannot be a long-term substitute for the public

governance of catastrophic risks.

NOTES

1. “OpenAI Announces Leadership Transition,” X, November 17
2023, https://twitter.com/OpenAl/status/ 1725611900262588813 |

2. “OpenAl Charter,” OpenAl, April 9, 2018, https://openai.com

/charter.

3. John Morley, David J. Berger, and Amy L. Simmerman, “An-
thropic Long-Term Benefit Trust,” Harvard Law School Forum
on Corporate Governance, October 28, 2023, https://corpgov.law
harvard.edu/2023/10/28/anthropic-long-term-benefit-trust/.

4. “Business Roundtable Redefines the Purpose of a Corporation
to Promote ‘An Economy That Serves All Americans, * Business
Roundtable, August 19, 2019, https://www.businessroundtable.org
/business-roundtable-redefines-the-purpose-of-a-corporation-to
-promote-an-economy-that-serves-all-americans.

>. Lucian A. Bebchuk and Roberto Tallarita, “Will Corporations

Deliver Value to All Stakeh »
olders?” Vi : ) 75
(2022): 1031-1091. anderbilt Law Review, vol

6. Luci
ucian Å. Bebchuk and Roberto Tallarita, *The Illusory Prom

ise of Stakeholder Gov
ernance, C 6
(2020): 91-178. ornell Law Review, vol. 10

7. Oliv nee

fi work Luigi Zingales, “Companies Should Maxim

pei å elfare Not Market Value,” Journal of Law, Finance,
counting, 2 (2017): 247-274.


Al Is Testing the Limits of Corporate Governance

8. Benjamin Hilton, "Preventing an Al-Related Catastrophe,
30,000 hours, August 2022, https://80000hours.org/problem
-profiles/artificial-intelligence/; “2022 Expert Survey on Progress
‘n AL,” AI Impacts, August 3, 2022, https://aiimpacts.org/2022

-expert-survey-on-progress-in-ai/.
9. AI Impacts, “2022 Expert Survey.”

10. Oliver Hart and John Moore, “Property Rights and the Nature
of the Firm,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 98, no. 6 (1990):

1119-1158.

Adapted from content posted on hbr.org, December 5, 2023.

9]


WHAT IS RESPONSIBLE
COMPUTING?

by Rashik Parmar, Marc Peters, and Llewellyn D.W. Thomas

ver the past few years, IBM has spoken to hundreds

of chief technology officers (CTOs) reflecting a cross
section of industries for a series of Architecture De-

cision Points reports.' Clearly, business leaders recognize
that technology will be a central part of delivering the
future enterprise. However, they are also well aware that
society is looking to businesses to prove they can live by
the values they espouse—and computing has a key role to
play. These same CTOs mentioned that the societal im-

pact of technology is keeping them up at night.

99


they are responsible users of technology, they need a ho-

listic approach.
Developed at IBM in conjunction with our CTO out-

reach, we have created a systemic responsible comput-
ing framework that integrates environmental challenges
including energy consumption and emissions with many
other social and governance aspects. It is a practical blue-
print that firms can use to make their IT more green,
ethical, trustworthy, and sustainable. Our responsible
computing framework highlights six pillars that business
leaders need to address for their businesses to become re
sponsible computing providers: data centers, infrastruc-
ture, code, data, systems, and impact. For each we provide

several key performance indicators (KPIs) that can be used

to provide comparisons.

100


What Is Responsible Computing?

Responsible Data Centers

The first pillar of responsible computing is the physi-
cal infrastructure you need to develop and deliver IT
services—whether or not you run data centers yourself.
The global power capacity of data centers has grown
by 43% in the last three years, and inefficiency is a signifi-
cant problem: The average server runs at 12% to 18% of
its capacity but draws 30% to 60% of maximum power.’
The International Energy Agency (IEA) predicts that the
energy use of global data centers will jump from 1% of
worldwide electricity demand to more than 20% in just
over a decade.”

To measure the impact of your data centers, you need

to consider the energy sources, energy use related to cool-
ing, and water usage, and track KPIs for each. If you dont

run your own data centers, most mature cloud service
providers, such as AWS, IBM, or Microsoft, measure this

as part of their service.
First, evaluate the carbon footprint, or the amount of

CO, that was emitted in generating the energy used by
data centers. Consider how much carbon dioxide a data

center produces every day (carbon usage effectiveness);
how clean the energy consumed by the data center Is

101


Parmar, Peters, and Thomas

(technology cat bon efficiency); and how much r€NeWable
energy IS generated onsite (green ree coefficient)

Next, there is the efficiency footprint, or how Optimizes
the data center is for its computing infrastructure. To
measure this, you can look at how much energy jg used
specifically by a data center's infrastructure, how Much
energy in the data center Is reused elsewhere in the facility,
and the HVAC system’s effectiveness, or the overall ef.
ciency of the cooling system.

Finally, there is the amount of water used by data cen.

ters as part of their operation, or water footprint. This
requires breaking down how water is used, considering
infrastructure, power generation, and how much gets re-
cycled for other purposes.

By having a clear picture of your power sources, cool-
ing, and water usage of your data centers, business leaders
can start to critically think about addressing the issue
How can you move to sustainable energy sources? How
can you use carbon offsets? Would moving your infra-
structure to a cooler climate save energy? Could you use

the heat generated by your infrastructure for another pur-
pose? How can you save water?

102


alee. |

What Is Responsible Computing?

Responsible Infrastructure

The second pillar is reducing the environmental impact
of computation. This requires that you assess the whole
computing ecosystem you work in, not just your own
infrastructure, including the hardware, software, and
networks required to develop, test, deliver, monitor, con-
trol, and support IT services. While most manufacturers
share this information when asked, there are also mul-
tiple industry initiatives, such as from the International
Telecommunication Union, to standardize data and de-
velop best practices.

First, consider the computing hardware in use now. This
can be measured by power usage KPIs, such as the aver-
age electricity consumption per hardware unit, how often
computing hardware is used, and the proportion of hard-
ware in use over a month compared to what is installed.

Next, you need to understand the greenhouse gas emis-
sions per unit of hardware, or unit carbon footprint. ‘This
KPI measures the total greenhouse gas emissions gener-
ated by a single hardware unit over the different stages of
its life cycle—from the original extraction of resources
through manufacturing of precursors and the making of
the unit, its operation, and then the emissions of disposal

once it is superseded.

103


Parmar, Peters, and Thomas

Finally, measure the amount of waste that Computin
B

enerates. This can include how much hardware i; Sent

5
to landfill versus refurbishment, reuse, resale, or salvag

(e-waste rate). It can also feature an assessment of yoy,
plastic footprint, calculated either by the total Weight of

plastic used or by the types of plastic polymers used, ang
their potential end destinations or likelihood of being

recycled.

Once you have considered your infrastructure, you can
start to consider actions to address your computing im-
pact. What technologies could you use that reduce power
per unit? How can you get more bang for your buck—for
example, through consolidating, rationalizing, or remoy-
ing systems you don't use? How about using your spare
capacity for other purposes? How can you recycle or reuse

more effectively?

Responsible Code

The third pillar is the efficiency of your code and the
potential environmental, societal, and economic impact
of the code in use. This involves bringing responsibility
to the level of individual developers and ensuring the de-
velopment of responsible design principles or architec
tures that will help them make the right choices.

104


What Is Responsible Computing?

Key to understanding how responsible code works are
function points, which are a way of expressing the amount
of business functionality that code provides. There are a
wide range of software tools (both open-source and com-
mercial) that can assist organizations in their analysis.
Start by measuring how efficient the function points
are, such as page size or HTTP requests per process. You
should also measure the carbon impact of each function
point—the electricity consumption for an entire system,
individual function points, or even for individual pro-
cesses within a function point. Measuring the security of

function points, such as the number of identified vulner-
abilities, is also vital.

Second, take a close look at your code architecture.
How scalable is it? How easy is it for the code to be moved
to another platform? The time taken or the cost to inte-
grate function points in one system with those in other
systems is also a valuable KPI.

Finally, measure the quality of your code—for instance,
the number of defects per function point—and its main-
tenance and rework attributes. You should also measure
the reliability of your code, such as the average uptime
per quarter for an entire system, function point, or even
individual process.

Once you understand the efficiency of function points,
as well as the overall architecture and quality, then you

105


Parmar, Peters, and Thomas

start tO consider how to improve. Should ie
an

C ary code? How secure is your code:

open or propriet Hoy

n is your code: å
Ge than good? Could you reduce the resolution of cal

-ulations through approximate computing?

Responsible Data

The fourth pillar of responsible computing is the Privacy,
transparency, sharing, and acquisition of data. This pillar
directly addresses your duty to understand the ethical,
legal, and social responsibility of processing data across
its life cycle. It also allows the leader to take or delegate
ownership and accountability on the protection and
privacy of the data and its usage.

Thankfully there is significant work going on in this
area. We suggest one KPI: the Responsible Data Matu-
rity Model, which provides insight into how data is being
managed in your business across 15 domains (awareness
and capacity, policy and governance, accountability, part-
nership, inventory, privacy, legal, risk, minimization,
transfer, security, sharing, combining, retention, and
incident response),

With this analysis you can understand how each do-
main can be improved and how to track improvement.

106

What Is Responsible Computing?

Do you have sufficient data governance in place? Are you

data and legal risks? How quickly do you respond to data

incidents?

Responsible Systems

Responsible systems are those that are fair, account-
able, and transparent. This fifth pillar asks business
leaders to understand their systems—the integrated
sets of hardware, data, code, models, and services used
in work—and the ethical implications of using them.
At the core of this pillar is the fairness—or bias—that
the systems within your organization have and how ac-
countable your firm is for what those systems do in your
name.

First, consider how one of your systems may discrimi-
nate against or harm people based on characteristics such
as race, gender, age, or disability. Measure this through
comparing the outcomes between groups. More sophis-
ticated comparisons can recognize that groups differ in
more than one dimension. Another approach can measure
how many complaints are received about the system fair-
ness and how they are addressed.

107


Next, determine which systems have specific ;
ssigned as responsible for outcomes, and Individ.
egulations, what means of mes
and how liable the business Pn re.

an

pened. These perspectives will

uals a
compliance with r

dress are available,

harms that may have hap
help you make these systems more transparent. B
DY hay.

ing a clear picture of how fair, accountable, and
» an trans-

parent your systems are, you can start to critical]
about addressing the issue. How can we redu ie
ce Dias in

O 2 o * .
ur systems? How can We minimize our exposu
re to lj-

ability? Who is responsible for what system?
An important KPI is the analysis of the numb
er of

In

Responsible Impact

The , |

ed RE how technology can be used

exclusion. But a to address social mobility 0

something an ecause your organization can do
mean it should. We suggest thé

108


What Is Responsible Computing?

computing in the context of the UN's 17 Sustainability
Development Goals (SDGs). Some impacts are more
general, such as enabling gender equality in hiring,
providing decent work, or reducing inequality in in-
come. KPIs here can consider how IT investment has
led to such impacts by looking at before and after sta-
tistics. Similarly, actions to meet climate change goals
can be measured through KPIs such as the carbon im-
pact per employee, per customer, and per stock taking
unit (SKU).

However, other impact measures will be specific to in-
dustries. For instance, the type of impact your IT use can
have in agriculture is different from in retail. Agricul-
tural firms can measure how their IT investments have
reduced the amount of water required to irrigate the
crops. Similarly, retail firms can measure how their IT
investments have enabled more sustainable consumption
and production.

Once you have insight into how your computing im-
pacts your performance on the SDGs, then you can start
to critically evaluate how to improve in the future. How
can your IT help save lives, or improve life, in a similar
way? How can you create new jobs or help people develop
new skills? How could you help speed up the response to

disasters or emergencies?

109


Parmar, Peters, and Thomas

The Way Forward

Geopolitics and world events postpandemic h
| a
business leaders very clearly that their workers VE shown
heed pr
O-

tection and their supply chains are shakier th
thought. That has focused attention on corporat an they
e respon-

sibility and how we use scarce resources. In IT s
| ec]

the new normal is all about being fast sites Pe,

» Cle ctive

and responsible.
pa <
The task facing business leaders is to position th
On their

firms for both scale and success while takin
= EEE approach to how, where, sl
ae mae ie st ae to agreed that PN 3
Simimitese ge requires a holistic approach that en-
HOGAN mar y rer of the computing ecosystem, from
ER EP right through to ethical sourc-
ee : ip, and social responsibility work.
They need % oe EN cant do it all on their own.
behind their res P ' at the entire IT function is aligned
ber of IT will ed ER EK vision. Every mem-
the responsible io ns the ethics that underpin
able for their acti sg vision, as well as be account
IT function th ons. This will require a professionalized
at has both the competence to deliver on the

vision and the j
ei SE
nclusivity to ensure diversity of opinion.

110


What Is Responsible Computing?

Beyond I I, the entire C-suite, employees, suppliers, part-
ners, and customers will need to be more mindful of how
they consume and conserve valuable resources—which
means offering them the right incentives to do so. Everyone
will have a part to play—infrastructure experts and appli-
cation developers, but also professionals in sales, market-
ing, operations, finance, procurement, and facilities.

It’s a big task, but the reward will be greater trust in the
organization—and, ultimately, a better world.

Firms can use the responsible computing framework to
make their IT more green, ethical, trustworthy, and sus-

tainable. The following pillars can help you become a re-

sponsible computing provider:

/ Datacenters: Consider and track energy sources,
energy use related to cooling, and water usage.

/ Infrastructure: Assess the computing ecosystem you
work in, including the hardware, software, and

networks required for IT services.

i


- Understand the ethical, legal, and social

responsibility of processing and storing data.

/ Systems: Identify the integrated sets of hardware
data, code, models, and services used in work, the

ethical implications of using them, and any bias

that may exist.

/ Impact: Consider how technology can be used for
good and what makes sense for your company and

industry.

NOTES

1. “The CTO Revelation: Redefining Responsibility, Accelerating
Discovery,” C-Suite Series, IBM Institute for Business Value, 2021,

https://www.ibm.com/thought-leadership/ institute-business-value
/en-us/c-suite-study/cto.

2. “The Global Data Center Market Size to Reach $288.30 Bil-
lion by 2027,” GlobeNewswire, February 23, 2022, https://www
globenewswire.com/news-release/2022/02/23/ 2390642/0/en
/The-Global-Data-Center-Market-Size-to-Reach-288-30-Billion
-by-2027-Arizton.html; “Scaling Up Energy Efficiency Across
the Data Center Industry: Evaluating Key Drivers and Barri-
ers, Data Center Efficiency Statement, NRDC, August 2014,

https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/data-center-efhiciency
-assessment-IP.pdf.

112


What Is Responsible Computing?

3. “Data Centres and Data Transmission Networks,” IEA, 2023

https://www.iea.org/energy-system/ buildings/data-centres-and
data-transmission-networks; Nicola Jones, “How to Stop Data
Centres from Gobbling Up the World’s Electricity,” Nature, Sep-
tember 12, 2018, https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018

-06610-Y.

Adapted from content posted on hbr.org, July 7, 2023 (product #H07PVO).

113


IT'S TIME TO FOCUS
ON THE GIN ESG

by Leo E. Strine Jr., Justin L. Brooke,
Kyle M. Diamond, and Derrick L. Parker Jr.

he largest mainstream institutional investors, and

m, now say they

the rating agencies that serve the
consider high-quality environmental, social, and gov-

ernance practices by corporations to be necessary for sus-

tainable, long-term wealth creation—a position that has

and political controversy.! But for all

generated academic
ir-

the debate surrounding the use of ESG for investing, V
tually no attention has been paid to a core tension In the

ESG policies of major investors and rating agencies—the
discordance of the G from the E and S.

115


Strine Jr., Brooke, Diamond, and Parker Jr.

oday's parlance, ESG is shorthand for things like

social responsibility, treating stakeholders well, and not

creating environmental harm. That is, in the Policy de.
bate, ESG is mostly about the E and S. Until recently, en.

vironmental, labor, and other social proposals at company
meetings drew little support from the “Big Three” aggey
managers (BlackRock, Vanguard, and State Street) or from
other mainstream investors. By contrast to £ and S$ propos.

als, G proposals to companies have long garnered strong
support from institutional investors, including the Big
Three. However, impetus for these successful G proposals
has had nothing to do with the environment or stakehold-
ers like workers, or issues like gender or racial diversity.
Rather, they promoted stockholder primacy by making
companies more open to the market for corporate control,
forcing changes in policy in the instance of a momentary
stockholder majority, and aligning company manage-
ments pay to only one constituency—stockholders—by
tying it tightly to total stock return.

In fact, by the time the current emphasis on ESG
emerged, the Big Three had already played a key role in
driving a sharp drop in the incidence of classified boards
and poison pills, turning withhold votes (a decision not
to vote for an incumbent board member on the man-

agement proxy) and annual say-on-pay votes into levers
for use by activist investors, and encouraging CEOs to

116


It's Time to Focus on the Gin ESG

squeeze other stakeholders to drive immediate returns to

‘nvestors. Suffice it to say, these manage-to-the-market
provisions are not what the public conceives of as the

ESG agenda, which favors sustainable wealth creation

over the juicing of short-term share prices. Especially at
the large-cap sector of the market, which affects most in-
vestors, these G moves made corporations more open to
changes in direction that could upend long-term strate-
gic plans, since companies had no ability to avoid an an-
nual referendum at which the company’s policies could
be altered by a momentary majority.

Scholars contest whether these sorts of direct democ-
racy approaches to corporate governance are beneficial
or harmful to diversified, long-term investors. Some aca-
demics have argued that greater responsiveness to the
market for corporate control and activism benefits stock-
holders, with no long-term harm to companies themselves
or other stakeholders. Others view the results differently
and believe that gains from activism are ephemeral and
mostly involve transfers in value from company workers,
creditors, and communities to short-term investors: also,
that companies are often harmed in the long run. As with
the general debate over corporate purpose and ESG, we
do not engage here with this tussle.

Rather, we focus on something more indisputable that
has been ignored. As the Big Three, other investors, and

117


e Jr, Brooke, Diamond, and Parker Jr.

Strin
dvisers like ESG raters have embraced a focus op Sus
a | Ss.
tainable wealth creation and more emphasis on the F ang

the S, their G policies have not changed. And thege å

the same G policies that have their origin in the desire of

stockholder primacists to make corporations focus More
investors and give them the ability to tak.

-isks to other stakeholders and put cost pressures on com.

panies in terms of regulatory compliance programs.
ESG requires a commitment to the long term. Even great

companies have years where they struggle, given market
dynamics. Persevering through tough times may be what
is required to pursue profits in an ethical and sustainable
way; there may be situations (say, a pandemic) when it is
necessary to reduce a dividend to keep paying the work-
force and comply with high standards of consumer and
environmental protection in accord with a well-thought-
out business plan. As historians have noted, if Abraham
Lincoln had had to face an annual election, he would likely
have been tossed out of office early in the Civil War in

stead of being judged on his full record in 1864.
To our minds, there are two important policy impli
cations of this disconnect between the investment com

118


It's Time to Focus on the Gin FSG

munity's stated ESG commitments and their approach
toward corporate governance. First, it is not clear that the
Big Three, other institutional investors, or the ESG rat-
ers have reflected on this tension and considered whether
their G policies should evolve accordingly. One could
imagine a range of measured issues that would bring G
back in alignment with ESG: supporting corporations that
wish to transition to the emerging public benefit corpo-
ration model, which requires respectful treatment of all
stakeholders; refusing to support withhold campaigns and
requiring activists to run actual candidates; calling for
executive compensation linked to ESG measures and not
just shareholder returns; scheduling quadrennial say-on-
pay votes aligned with a sensible time line for executive
pay contracts; and even rethinking blanket opposition to
classified boards. For ESG raters, there is an additional
issue. To the extent that companies are getting credit for
simply having managed-to-the market G, is that made
clear? And how does it obscure and confuse the rating a
company gets on the E and S?

The second and more important policy implication
of investors’ ESG discordance is this: The more corpora-
tions are subject to constant plebiscites, the more institu-
tional investors themselves must become the guardians
for whether corporations can implement sustainable,
stakeholder-respectful strategies to create durable wealth.

119


Strine Jr., Brooke, Diamond, and Parker Jr.

Sustainable wealth creation is not produced through

proposal at one annual meeting. Rather, it requires »,

tience, the willingness to weather adversity during cha)
lenging periods of change and unexpected headwin ds
and putting the long term ahead of a tempting, but ud:
wise, short-term action. As we have seen in the years
after an ESG-activist hedge fund succeeded in electing

‘ts own candidates to the ExxonMobil board, investor
sentiment can be erratic, with inflation at the pump and
other immediate economic disruptions driving less vat.
ing support for stockholder proposals to confront cJi-

mate change. And, given the powerful pressures that all
institutional investors are under to generate immediate
returns themselves, plus the herd pressures of short-term

Morningstar ratings, a corporate governance system that
subjects corporations to the constant threat of an imme-

diate referendum and the use of say-on-pay and other
votes as ways to express dismay over dips in short-term
profit presents a sizable, steadfast challenge to all insti-
tutional investors. In addition, the overwhelming num-
ber of votes they must cast is especially burdensome on
institutional investors with more limited stewardship
resources—a phenomenon that increases the influence of
proxy advisory firms—as well as on the Big Three, whose
own stewardship capacity is outmatched by the number

of votes they must cast each year.

120

|


It's Time to Focus on the Gin FSG

A more tempered system of corporate governance would
still provide robust accountability to investors, while giv-
ing corporations some reasonable space to balance the
needs of all stakeholders and carry out a sustainable plan
of long-term growth. Such a system would also allow in-
stitutional investors to concentrate their limited steward-
ship resources more effectively by casting fewer but more
informed votes, guided by their stated intent to support
the responsible wealth creation that American worker-
investors need. At the very least, if big investors continue
to embrace G policies that put the market’s preferences
above all else, then those investors must own up to their

responsibility to support—at every vote, every year, even
when things are tough—the sustainable corporate poli-
cies they say they embrace.

Too little attention has been paid to a core tension in the
ESG policies of major investors and rating agencies—the
discordance of the G from the E and S.

/ Major investors promote stockholder primacy
by making companies more open to the market

121


Strine Jr., Brooke, Diamond, and Parker Jr.

for corporate control, forcing changes in Policy
during brief instances of stockholder majority
and aligning company management's pay to only
stockholders, but such actions won't offer long-

. pp
term “sustainable: management.

/ It's not clear whether investors or ESG raters cop.
sidered whether their G policies should evolve. In.

vestors must address this discordance by amend} ng
their activities at shareholder annual meetings.

/ Institutional investors must become the guardians
for whether corporations can implement sustain-
able, stakeholder-respectful strategies to create
durable wealth.

NOTE

1. Andrew A. King and Kenneth P. Pucker, “ESG and Alpha: Sales
or Substance?” Institutional Investor, February 25, 2022, https://
www.institutionalinvestor.com/article/2bstmmn7nssoo5njaf5kw
/opinion/esg-and-alpha-sales-or-substance; Andrew Ross Sor-
kin et al., “The Pushback on E.S.G. Investing,” New York Times,

May 11, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/11/business
/dealbook/esg-investing-pushback.html.

Adapted from content posted on hbr.org, November 18, 2022 (product #H07C82).

122


Section 3

MANAGING SOCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY


HOW TO BE
PROACTIVE—NOT
REACTIVE—ON
SOCIAL ISSUES

by Lily Zheng

political development from a major institution

shakes society. A social controversy takes over the

news cycle. A major tragedy, violence, or disaster

puts a spotlight on social inequity. After these events
occur, your workforce is anxious and distracted. Your
customers are no different. These stakeholders direct the

same question to your organization’s leadership:

125


Zheng

«What are you and your organization going t
Odo
abo
ut

this?”
If you've felt like the pressure on organizatj
ations, e
ESpe-

cially corporations, to take action on social

'ncreased in the last few years, you d be well iv issues has
thinking so. The latest data from the Edelma din

n Trust p

a-

rometer, an NGO researching trust in societal inst;
Stitutio
Ns,

shows Business as the sole remaining “trustworth
INStj-

i amid plummeting trust in Government
ite 2020 worldwide.' And while survey res ane Media
dicated low trust in “CEOs, they para Pel pe In-
hig? and growing trust in “my CEO”—hi i indicated
increasing expectations among sinthovees ighting the
world that their employer take action. around the

Ive seen the same in my work with U

pam one corporations in the last mad Re
sp GE kjend
ice ci a against ae to ikek
pa oe _— s overturn. What's become
ara nee the increasing urgency from
greater role 7 7 kinds for corporations to take ona
ers are vastly wn cial change, a large proportion of lead-
hor iin EE or even unaware of these ex-
RDP y choose to take action at all, they more
ot follow a long-outdated playbook of one-

126


How to Be Proactive-Not Reactive—on Social Issues

bias trainings, and social media posts that come across
15 the corporate equivalent of “thoughts and prayers,”
These efforts may be seen by stakeholders not only as
‘nadequate, but also as potential indicators that cor-
porate diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) initiatives
are performative, or similarly done for show but not
effectiveness.

What stakeholders want, and what many leaders are
as yet unprepared to deliver on, is a proactive rather
than reactive approach to taking action on social issues,
wherein corporations take on greater responsibility, not
only for their impact on society but for society's impact
on corporate stakeholders like employees, customers,

and communities.

The paradox many leaders face is the relative difficulty
of taking on sucha substantial reimagining of their orga-
nization’s role in the world, compared to the relative ease
of making a donation, commenting on social media, or
investing in short-term resources. Ås a result, short-term
actions always win out—a reasonable decision in isola-
tion, but a compounding problem over time as stake-
holders expect greater action that never comes. Resolving
this tension requires prioritizing the “right” reactive ef-
forts and using the time and trust they generate to take on
longer-term proactive work in parallel. I typically advise
my clients to take the following steps if they re looking to

127


inequity,
public, political stance. These resources are often framed

as neutral and available to all rather than accessible only
to a specific group. Examples of safety net resources to

consider offering and investing In include:

. Funding travel for necessary health care proce-

dures not offered locally

Ensuring consistent levels of accessibility, inclu-

sion, and fair treatment in all physical offices
around the world, even where local regulations

do not mandate it

¢ Creating well-resourced and regular community-

building efforts with your workforce

« Offering expansive employee benefits like remote
work, flextime, parental leave, and employee as-
sistance programs, and designing an inclusive,

128


How to Be Proactive—Not Reactive—on Social Issues

culturally competent, trauma-informed health care

plan that supports a wide range of communities

and identities

In the absence of these resources, social inequities in-
side and outside the company may disproportionately
harm members of marginalized communities. However,
the presence of these resources provides tangible benefits
to all your employees, regardless of identity. Importantly,
the rollout of these resources can increase employee en-
gagement and trust in leadership, both important pre-

requisites to more substantial initiatives.

Codify and operationalize your organizations
mission and values into a DEI strategy

The output and outcome of this process, beyond a feel-
good statement that will live on a wall or a website, is a
shared understanding of internal and external outcomes
that the organization is invested in and how it plans to
achieve them. When a mission and values are effectively
operationalized into a compelling DEI strategy, they serve
as moral guidelines that enable internal- and external-
facing actions taken in their name to be consistent and

congruous, and to appear so to stakeholders.

129


Zheng

The process of creating a DEI strategy should involy.

4 wide range of stakeholder groups, including employee

customers, business partners, vendors, and loca] commy

nities. These groups should be surveyed to understand their
perception of the organizations identity, what issues they
want the organization to weigh in on, and what Outcomes
they want the organization to achieve. Leaders can then
-efine these insights into a concise set of organizational
priorities and guidelines to be enacted.

Many organizations prematurely celebrate after creating
these guiding documents, but their usefulness comes pri-
marily from how they impact decision-making processes
and organizational culture for all leaders and employees.
To ensure that the effort put into their creation pays off,
leaders should follow through by training all decision-
makers on how to apply these guidelines in practice and
make certain that all aspects of the employee experience

align with the mission, values, and strategy.

Pursue internal and external initiatives that
align with your mission and values

The most critical test of a DEI strategy is its ability to
turn what would, in isolation, be a nebulous or abstract

value into effective decision-making at scale.

130


How to Be Proactive—Not Reactive—on Social Issues

A value of “empowerment” might be operationalized
‘ato a strategy of “supporting stakeholder autonomy.”
Internally, this might look like supporting employee
agency over their work and workflow with a generous
remote and flexible work policy, training all managers
to evaluate results rather than hours worked, and equip-
ping all leaders with inclusive leadership practices to
create psychologically safe working environments. Ex-
ternally, this might look like supporting constituents’
ability to make decisions for themselves and investing
in community resources, information literacy, K-12 edu-
cation, and access to health care, especially for under-

served populations.
A value of “connection” might be operationalized into a

strategy of “cross-group learning and collaboration.” In-
ternally, this might look like normalizing regular cross-
department contact and coworking, ensuring that leaders
of all employee resource groups (ERGs) meet regularly
to discuss their communities’ needs, updates, and initia-
tives, and creating a rotating mentorship program where
junior employees can build relationships with senior lead-
ership. Externally, this might look like connecting cus-
tomers to local advocacy and community organizations,
lobbying against legislation that drives wedges between

communities, and divesting from partners and vendors

that support hate groups.

131


Zheng

Act consistently

Understand that no organization can or should weigh in
on every issue. SO long as your organization is consisten:
in the types of issues it gets involved with, consistently
sets and meets expectations with stakeholders on how
it gets involved when it does, and builds mechanisms to
course-correct periodically, it has a greater chance of cre-
ating social impact without incurring social controversy
or perpetuating harm.

Stakeholder groups play a large role in ensuring ac-
countability. Consider creating compensated advisory
boards and cross-functional groups that convene HR,
communications, ERG, DEI, and legal professionals, as
well as executives whose role it is to weigh in on break-
ing news and social developments as they happen. Create a
decision-making process to ensure your organization can
respond in a timely and disciplined manner, rather than
scrambling reactively every time an emergency occurs.

Every six months to a year, consider at least a cursory
engagement with customer focus groups and employees
to stay on top of stakeholder needs and sentiment. Keep
track of responses to internal and external advocacy et

forts, especially when your actions miss the mark, and

132


How to Be Proactive-Not Reactive—on Social Issues

use that information to continually refine your social im-

pact strategy.

Many of the leaders I talk to are nervous about taking
action on social issues. They see the consequences of
failure—being excoriated on social media; pundits call-
ing their actions “performative; being criticized by their
workforce for initiatives that weren't cheap or easy to un-
dertake in the first place—and may wonder if doing noth-
ing is “safer” than trying and failing. But while the old
playbook is now outdated, stakeholders are clear about
what they want: consistency, bravery, and a willingness to
take a stance on social issues, even at the expense of short-
term profit. Effective leaders who embrace these new ex-
pectations and act effectively will see their efforts pay off.

Companies are increasingly feeling pressure to take
action on social issues, but far too many tend to re-

spond reactively—making a donation or social media

133


Zheng

instead of taking proactive measures to byj) 4

statemen | pi
lusion in their own organizations. Here å

equity and inc
four actions to take:

/ Invest in “safety net” resources that support ment:
bers of the organization from the worst ramifica.

tions of social inequity.

/ Codify and operationalize your organization’s
mission and values into a diversity, equity, and

inclusion (DEI) strategy.

/ Pursue internal and external initiatives that align

with your mission and values.

/ Act consistently—you dont have to weigh in on

every issue.

NOTE

1. “Edelman Trust Barometer 2022,” Global Report, Edelman,
https://www.edelman.com/sites/g/files/aatuss191/files/2022-01
/2022%20Edelman%20Trust%20Barometer%20Global%20Report
_Final.pdf.

Adapted from “How Companies Can Be Proactive—Not Reactive—on Social Issues,
on hbr.org, September 2, 2022 (product #H077GQ),

134


TONY'S CHOCOLONELY
AND ITS
PURPOSE-DRIVEN
(AND PROFITABLE]
SUPPLY CHAIN

by Frans Pannekoek, Thomas Breugem,
and Luk N. Van Wassenhove

upply chains for many commodity products—such
as cocoa, cotton, and sugar—are highly fragmented.
In the case of cocoa, most of which comes from

West Africa, the raw product is produced by more than

5

135


Pannekoek, Breugem, and Wassenhove

3 million farmers who supply a complex network of mid
en, With an average farm size of three to five hectare
$

and an estimated income of less than two dollars a day
nearly all of these farmers live below the poverty line. It i
1n environment rife with social and environmental abuse

Players in the cocoa business—and industries like
+—are aware of the negative impacts but find it hard to
respond, especially when under pressure to deliver cost.
driven performance. Nobody wants child labor, for ex.
ample, but everyone is locked into capturing value within
the existing system. In this paradigm, actors are alienated
fom each other, in that they have no control over and take
little interest in what other actors are doing—just so long
as the price is right for them.

Taking a moral high ground—for example, by refus-
ing to deal with supply chain counterparties who exploit
children—risks their own livelihoods while achieving no
improvement for the children, since there are always less
principled competitors ready to do business with the ex-
ploiters. Nor are the issues clear-cut; rural families on the
poverty line with lots of children often have little choice
but to put them to work or send them to work on planta-

tions where they are highly likely to be exploited, even

enslaved.
There are no easy answers to problems like these. Buta

business ecosystem will only produce positive social and

136


Tony's Chocolonely and Its Purpose-Driven (and Profitable} Supply Chain

environmental outcomes if the players involved can rein-
vent their supply chains so that individual actors in the
system are NO longer alienated from each other. In these
new resonating supply chains, as we call them, profit and
social goals are closely intertwined and aligned rather
than in conflict with one another.

But how can this kind of change be brought about if
the players are alienated in the first place? To answer this
question, we Il look at the experience of Tony’s Chocolo-
nely, a Dutch chocolate brand founded in 2005, which set
itself a mission to sell 100% slavery-free chocolate. We'll
show how Tonys brought its supply chain partners to-
gether to create an altogether new paradigm in which all
actors take responsibility for social impact. And it really
works: Tony’s profitably sells around $130 million worth
of slavery-free chocolate bars in Western Europe and the

United States.

Turn Counterparties into Partners

There are economic advantages to supply chains that are
fragmented and transactional as suppliers along the chain
compete on price, quality, and availability. The consumer
here is the prime beneficiary. But if social and environ-

mental value are also required, players need to know and

137


end supply chain, from market proposition to sourcing
raw materials. Tony's quickly realized that Many actors—
notably, the managers of farming co-ops in West Africa
did not feel part of the cocoa supply chain. After loading 4
truck at the collection point with bags full of cocoa beans,

their involvement was over. They had no idea where the
beans were going.

Tony's started including co-op managers in the over.
sight of its supply chain. It agreed upon annual planned
production volumes with the co-ops and gave manag-
ers access to a shared, digital, open information plat-
form tracking bean shipments and deliveries. Tony’s also
hosts a kickoff event for the annual supply cycle, which
brings together farming co-ops, NGOs, and certifica-
tion bodies, along with representatives of other supply

chain players, including Tony’s main chocolate producer,
Swiss-based Barry Callebaut, and leading cocoa bean

traders. The group reviews the previous season, aligns

plans for the upcoming season, and discusses market
risks and opportunities. These events serve to make the

138


Tony's Chocolonely and Its Purpose-Driven (and Profitable) Supply Chain

various stakeholders feel like partners in a system rather
than anonymous counterparties.

This approach has made Tony’s an attractive partner
for co-ops in West Africa. In 2016 the company success-
fully onboarded ECAM, a reputed cooperative in Ivory
Coast that had been supplying big chocolate companies
for years. When Tonys shared its standard annual plan
agreement with the co-op manager, she said that she had
never had a contract with, or received official commit-
ments from, a cocoa buyer before.

Companies starting on this path must expect road
bumps. In 2020 Tony's encountered a case of structural
fraud at one of its partner co-ops. The company took seri-
ous measures: It suspended purchases from the co-op for
a year and required a change of the co-op management

team. But it continued investing in the co-op and sup-
porting its attempt to regain the Fairtrade certification

it had lost. Tony’s communicated transparently about

the situation online and in its annual reports, and in the

following year, resumed buying from the co-op.

Agree on Responsible Business Practices

In transactional supply chains like the cocoa business,

value creation may not necessarily receive financial

139


Pannekoek, Breugem, and Wassenhove

reward. The quality and quantity of beans pro dusk
West African farmers have not changed significantly 7
In

the past 30 years, yet the earnings of farmers have 4
‘ly. This is because a few dominant choco] e.
ate

profits for themselves.
Once a company has successfully fostered relationsh;
Ds

across and between its supply chain partners, anonym-
ity between players 1s removed, making it possible for the
company to create consensus around responsible business
practices. Tonys developed and committed itself to what

it calls its “five sourcing principles, aimed at helpin
cocoa farmers out of poverty and eliminating child te
The implementation of each principle is clearly defined
and, where appropriate, supported by tools. For example
one of the principles is that Tonys develops aida
relationships with the co-ops it purchases from. ‘This is
specifically embodied in a five-year Kinoen of un-
Eg between the company and the co-op, which
7 — to after a one-year trial relationship nl on an
oe ae agreement. Another principle is that all
ee i = supply chain should be traceable, and
, Tony’s has developed a tracking platform

ie |
hat its supply chain partners can use.

140


Tony's Chocolonely and Its Purpose-Driven (and Profitable) Supply Chain

Tony's principles have had tangible—and dramatic—
-esults. From 2020-2021 the International Cocoa Initia-
tive detected cases of child labor at just 4.4% of Tony’s
co-ops member farms, compared with instances at 52.8%
of member farms in co-ops not partnering with Tony’s.
The average income for farmers who had been in Tony’s
co-ops for three years more than doubled.

Tony’s has taken its initiative a step further with Tony’s
Open Chain, a collaboration platform bringing together
industry players from the chocolate and other confec-
tionery businesses. Companies participating in the initia-
tive have to sign up to the five principles and must share
knowledge, tooling, partners, infrastructure, and com-
munications at cost price. Companies that have signed up
include the ice cream maker Ben & Jerrys, which joined
the platform in August 2022.

Share the Data

The credibility of a company is at stake when its com-
munications on purpose and impact do not match op-
erating realities. It might at first be given the benefit of
the doubt, but eventually must provide proof of impact,
otherwise it will face accusations of greenwashing or

its social impact equivalent. At the same time, many

141


. nications fail to r |
ompanies’ marketing commu “CORNizg
C

the companies may actually be doing in terms or
oe 2) meaning they miss out on opportunities fo, ob.
impact, |

ning impact price premiums.

orients and examples with both internal and
external stakeholders reduces both these risks, It helps
the different supply chain players work together eff.
ciently and feel connected to Tony's to each other, and to
the shared goal of eradicating child labor and reducing

Several years of developing and testing different tools,
including a blockchain pilot, were needed to build the
“beantracker” we alluded to earlier, which organizes and
tracks physical flows between supply chain actors and
records farmer membership data, GPS farm size data,
beans output, and productivity. This data is input for
farmer coaching and other agronomic improvement pro-
grams. The tracker also holds the data triggering the issue
of premium invoices from partner co-ops to Tonys. In
addition, there is an “impact dashboard” that shares in-
formation about the social impact the new approach has
on participating farmers. What comes back to Tonys are
examples of children who are doing well at school and

families who are now able to install basic sanitation In
their homes.

142


Tony's Chocolonely and Its Purpose-Driven {and Profitable) Supply Chain

Collaborate to Achieve the Common Good

Traditionally, business prospers when companies com-
pete—and businesses arent sustainable unless they can
compete effectively. But competition doesn’t work so well
for challenges like child labor or CO, reduction.

Cocoa provides a case in point. During trips to Ghana
and Ivory Coast, Tony's teams often encountered kids
on plantations and on the dirt roads around villages.
When asked where they had been, they always gave the
same answer, “school,” even when the circumstances,
location, or time and day of the week would make that
highly unlikely.

The kids’ answers are the result of a decades-long rit-
ual dance between cocoa buyers and cocoa-producing
communities. Cocoa buyers don’t want child labor in their
chain, so when they find cases, the easiest way IS to stop
buying cocoa from those communities, thereby protecting

their certifications. But the result is that cocoa-producing

communities instruct their children to avoid answers

that may lead to losing a buyer, thereby making the prob-

lem invisible.
This perverse outcome 1S precisely why competition

fails in the face of challenges like child labor, which are by

their nature common problems, requiring collaborative

143


Pannekoek, Breugem, and Wassenhove

responses IN which companies work together with
petitors, suppliers, NGOs, and governments to educate
consumers about social issues in product supply ch aing
Created in 2015, the International Cocoa Initiative’. Child
tabor Monitoring and Remediation System (CLMRg)
provides a good example of what this can achieve, Th,
International Cocoa Initiative (ICI) is a cocoa-industry.

focused NGO initially set up by the Swiss food giant
Nestlé, and since 2015, its CLMRS has been adopted by

many chocolate companies as the standard child labo,

monitoring tool.

This Tony’s Chocolonely case shows how even a relatively
small brand operating in a commodity industry that
produces negative social and environmental effects can
successfully build an alternative ecosystem to lift people
out of poverty and the social injustices that accompany
it. Tony's experience also shows that the resonant supply
chain paradigm offers a basic framework for engaging
with these issues. It can help managers transition their
company and implement an impact-led supply chain that

aligns business results with impact results.

144


Tony's Chocolonely and Its Purpose-Driven (and Profitable) Supply Chain

Like many commodity products, the cocoa farming in-
dustry in West Africa is known to be susceptible to child
labor, exploitation, and even slavery. But Tony’s Choco-
lonely, a Dutch chocolate brand, set itself a mission to sell
100% slavery-free chocolate. Here are some tips for reduc-
ing social and environmental abuses in other commodity

supply chains:

/ Turn counterparties into partners by investing
time in getting to know all actors in the supply

chain and providing oversight.

/ Agree on responsible business practices that are

clearly defined and, where appropriate, supported
by tools, such as blockchain technology.

/ Share data with internal and external stakeholders

to show how purpose and impact match operating

realities.

/ Collaborate with competitors, suppliers, NGOs,
and governments to achieve the common good,

rather than competing with them.


NOTE

1. Antonie C. Fountain and Friedel Huetz-Adams, "Cocoa Ba
rometer 2020, VOICE Network, https://voicenetwork.cc/wp
_content/uploads/ 2021/03/2020-Cocoa-Barometer-EN. pdf.

Adapted from “How Tony’s Chocolonely Created a Purpose-Driven (and Profitab
Supply Chain, on hbr.org, September 11, 2023 (product $HO7SFE). able)

146


HOW COMPANIES

CAN PARTNER
WITH NONPROFITS

by Bruce Simpson, Talia Varley, and Giulia Siccardo
ifteen years ago, if Goldman Sachs went looking for
f nancial advice, a small, green nonprofit might be

F last place it looked. Today, the firm and a host

of other Wall Street giants don’t think twice about part-

nering with JUST Capital, a nonprofit that provides
third-party data, tools, and insights to help measure and

improve corporate performance on stakeholder and ESG

issues.

147


simpson, Varley, and Siccardo

The partnership is part of a growing trend in Which
for-profit Grms are finding value in partnering with ESC.
minded nonprofits they once may have shunned. And
why not? The very best nonprofits have much to teach doe

porations. They have a parpene sane focus that perme.
ates their DNA—something corporations are increasingly
seeking out for themselves.

Nonprofits also have constant dialogue and connec.
tion with their stakeholders and effectively engage their
boards. In contrast, many corporations struggle in these
areas. Only 20% of organizations believe they successfully
communicate their strategy to a broad set of externa]
stakeholders. And only 60% say that their boards under.
stand their core technology and business model. In light
of these challenges, nonprofits provide skills, experience,
and partnership opportunities corporations could tap
into on their ESG journey.

Unfortunately, many corporations don’t know where
to start. What contact they have had with nonprofits
has usually been through their corporate giving or
corporate social responsibility programs—or even
their PR department in cases where they are deflect-
ing criticism from NGOs. We set out to sketch out the

areas of opportunity for corporations to partner with
nonprofits.

148


How Companies Can Partner with Nonprofits

Opportunity #1: Consider Nonprofit
Partnerships to Support Product Launches

Collaborations allow corporations to leverage nonprofits’
capabilities and reputation when launching new prod-
ucts and services. According to Nonprofits Source, 90%
of corporations say they gain trust when partnering with
reputable nonprofit organizations, and 89% believe such
partnerships enhance their ability to drive societal impact.’

To be absolutely clear, nonprofit partnerships are not a
substitute for foundational change. To truly accelerate a
corporate ESG journey, nonprofit partnerships need to go
way beyond PR or branding. Corporations need to ensure
their core businesses deliver holistic impact while they
engage nonprofits on the issues and business lines where
they aspire to develop and deepen influence. In that con-
text, these partnerships can elevate impact and drive value

as part of a transformational corporate ESG strategy.

Opportunity #2: Go to Market
with Your Nonprofit Arm

Corporate nonprofit and for-profit arms can work pro-

ductively together as long as their roles and sandboxes

149


Simpson, Varley, and Siccardo

are crystal clear. Excessive overlap creates confusion
and—potentially—consumer suspicion. However, When
nonprofit and for-profit arms have their own clear sang.
boxes and work synergistically, there is the potentia] for

enhanced impact. Tomorrow.io provides a persuasive

example.
Tomorrow.io is a leading weather and climate security

platform. It provides highly accurate, location-specific
weather intelligence up to two weeks out. This enables
“weather sensitive” industries to make better decisions
related to, for example, irrigation, field maintenance, event
management, and building controls, as well as deliver op-
erational and ESG benefits. While Tomorrow.io provides
meaningful insights for companies, its TomorrowNow.org
branch leverages Tomorrow.io's commercial technolo-
gies to provide early warning of extreme weather events
to underrepresented communities and focus on weather
education and community building. For example, its To-
morrow Locust Project is helping to anticipate and man-
age locust swarms in Africa. TomorrowNow.org and
Tomorrow.io represent a unique hybrid model whereby
a for-profit-nonprofit feedback loop enables “shared pur-

pose, catalytic solutions, and accelerated impact.”
NGOs are also sharpening their approach when it

comes to leveraging for-profit activity to further their

150


How Companies Can Partner with Nonprofits

purpose-driven mission, vision, and values—ultimately
showcasing that hybrid synergies exist, whether an orga-
nization is for-profit or nonprofit at its core.

Cleveland Clinic is an example. It operates syner-
gistic, for-profit businesses to contribute to the NGO’s
mission. Cleveland Clinic is a nonprofit medical center
that integrates clinical and hospital care with research
and education. Its business lines range from execu-
tive health and concierge medicine clinical services,
to advisory services in the ESG space that provide col-
laboration opportunities with for-profit entities to yield
distinct social intelligence and insights for corpora-
tions. Meanwhile, the Cleveland Clinic Ventures arm
has launched more than 80 startup companies that have
provided economic returns while furthering the non-

profit's ambitions.

Opportunity #3: Address Market Gaps with
Nonprofit Coalitions of For-Profit Companies

In facing ESG challenges, companies can work together to
share information, create standards, and even send mar-
ket signals. In 2022 Alphabet, Meta, Shopify, Stripe, and
McKinsey created an almost $1 billion advance market

151


affordable carbon removal market. Carbon removals
will be required to neutralize unavoidable emissions ang
meet the global net-zero commitments by 2050, as stipu.
lated in the Paris Agreement. None of these companies
could unilaterally make a large enough commitment to
create a market. But together, through a nonprofit-like

vehicle, they can.

Despite the inherent paradox, businesses have much
to learn from nonprofit models and much to gain
from partnering with NGOs. Strategic nonprofit re-
lationships and partnerships, when well executed, are
extremely powerful. They reduce risk, drive speed and
growth, increase shareholder value, and enhance soci-
etal impact. If your organization is embarking on an
ESG journey or wants to improve ESG performance, non-

profit partnerships are an untapped opportunity worth
exploring.

152


How Companies Can Partner with Nonprofits

Many corporations dont know where to start when it
comes to partnership opportunities with nonprofits. What
contact they have had has usually been through their cor-
porate giving or corporate social responsibility programs.
Three main opportunities exist for collaboration:

/ Use nonprofits to support product launches. Collabora-
tions allow corporations to leverage nonprofits’

capabilities and reputation when releasing new

products and services.

/ Goto market through a company s nonprofit arm. Corpo-
rate nonprofit and for-profit arms within the same

company can work productively together as long
as their roles and sandboxes are crystal clear.

/ Address market gaps with nonprofit coalitions of for-profit
companies. In facing ESG challenges, companies
can work together to share information, create
standards, and even send market signals, thereby
creating a market through a nonprofit-like vehicle.


Simpson, Varley, and Siccardo

NOTE

1. “The Ultimate List of Charitable Giving Statistics for 2
Nonprofits Source, https://nonprofitssource.com/online ae

_statistics/.

Adapted from “How Companies Can Partner with Nonprofits” by Br |
and Talia Varley on hbr.org, November 25, 2022 (product #H07D17) uce Simpson

154

WHY BUSINESS
LEADERS MUST

RESIST THE ANTI-ESG
MOVEMENT

by Andrew Winston

he culture wars in the United States continue to rage,

and they've come for business. Companies are being
dragged into issues that stir emotions, such as abor-
tion, gay and trans rights, racial and gender equity, and
climate change. Business is facing questions, mainly from
the right side of the political aisle, about its stance on so-
cietal issues. And with 70% of America’s top execs calling


Winston

themselves Republicans, business leaders now find them.
selves in an odd position: accused by high-profile mem.
bers and pundits from their own party of being part of å
“woke” or *ESG” progressive agenda.

For many companies, it may seem smart to stay oy
of anyone’s crosshairs. but try as they might, there’s no
avoiding taking positions on the big issues of the day

major stakeholders, particularly young customers and
employees, expect it.

Preparing for and figuring out a response to accusa-
tions of “wokeness” is now a top leadership priority, so
let’s unpack what’s going on. We'll start with the most
prominent examples facing organizations today. Then, II]
outline what leaders should consider going forward in
light of today's political attacks.

What Is the “Anti-ESG” Movement About?

First, some terminology and background on how a va-
riety of issues have been lumped together. ESG is pri-
marily the language the financial world uses to represent
attempts to measure the risk (and opportunity) to a com-
pany or investment stemming from environmental and
social issues. The G part refers to how well a company

manages the governance of these issues.

156


Why Business Leaders Must Resist the Anti-ESG Movement

«Gystainability” is a much broader idea that looks at a
company $ role in society and how it impacts, and is im-
pacted by, the full gamut of environmental and social is-
sues. The label "anti-ESG' makes it sound like going after
nvestors (more on that in a bit) is the end goal. But it's just
part of a larger *anti-woke and anti-sustainability effort,
which was summed up nicely in an article by an executive
at fund giant Morningstar: “Anti-ESG [is] a proxy for op-
position to the spread of ‘liberal values’ in civil society.”

How is this broad opposition to environmental and
social sustainability playing out for business? Here are a

few examples:

LGBTQ+ rights

The most prominent example of government coming
after business over social issues is arguably the case of the
GOP governor and legislature of Florida versus the Walt
Disney Company (the state's biggest employer). In 2022
the then-CEO of the happiest places on earth spoke out
against Florida’s so-called "don't say gay” bill that would,
in Disney's words, “unfairly target gay, lesbian, non-binary
and transgender kids and families.”” The public state-
ment came only after intense pressure and outrage from

his employees.

157


Supporting LGBTQ+ rights is not remotely New to bug.
ness, especially in hospitality, where ™ industry hag long
seen the benefit of marketing to, and hiring from, the gay
community. But the normally anti-big-government |e gis.
lators and governor behind the bill came down on Disp ey,
taking away some long-standing economic advantages aia
the company’s ability to govern itself in central Florida.

The battle raged for more than a year. Disney had some
success in legal wrangling to weaken the government’s
influence over its operations, and the returning CEO

Bob Iger (replacing the one who needed nudging from
employees to speak out) told shareholders that Florida’s
retaliatory actions were not just “anti-business... but

anti-Florida.”*

Abortion

In the wake of the Dobbs U.S. Supreme Court decision
overturning the right to abortion, companies have faced
new, tough choices. A number have offered to pay for trans-
portation to other states for reproductive care for employ-
ees In states where abortion is outlawed. Companies with
more direct connections to health care, particularly the
big pharmacy and drug chains, have faced pressure about
whether they will sell legal abortion pills.

158


Why Business Leaders Must Resist the Anti-ESG Movement

niversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI)

In the few years following the murder of George Floyd
‘1 2020, there was a dramatic increase in chief diver-

sity officer roles, and company performance on diversity
metrics became a much more common part of executive
compensation. Corporate America publicly committed
at least $50 billion to confront systemic racism (with de-
batable success and follow-through).”

With the perceived pressure of the anti-ESG movement,
and a Supreme Court case knocking down affirmative ac-
tion in higher education, the fate of corporate DEI is less
clear. That said, companies are generally proud of their
DEI work and have continued making commitments, like
the initiative from Ariel Investments, Project Black, which
brings together Walmart, JPMorgan Chase, Lowes, and
other major brands to build a more diverse supply chain.
Besides the long-standing evidence that diversity improves
corporate creativity and performance, theres a simple and
powerful logic for DEI: The younger workforce and cus-
tomer segments that companies need to thrive are more
diverse. Companies are just reflecting reality.

Perhaps because the change in society Is unstoppable,

the anti-ESG crowd regularly attacks DEI, even in non-
sensical ways. Immediately after the fall of Silicon Valley

159


Winston

Bank in 2023, Floridas governor and far right Pundits
blamed the collapse on “wokeness’ and diversity. A shock.
ing op-ed in the Wall Street Journal, commenting on the

bank’s modest improvements in representation on the

board, declared, “I’m not saying 12 white men woujg
have avoided this mess, but the company may have been
distracted by diversity demands.” These statements are
not only baseless—theres zero evidence of diversity

playing any role at all in the collapse—they're ignorant

and racist.

ESG investing

The idea of screening investments on environmental
and social issues goes back decades. But in recent years,
a critical mass of investors clearly decided that global
mega-challenges like climate change create economic and
business risk that they should understand and include
in decision-making. They screened companies on ESG-
related risk, created massive new funds, and attracted
trillions of capital for funds.

As with all financial trends, there are ups and downs,

and times of speeding up and times when things plateau.
Total inflows to ESG funds have slowed more recently,
and attacks on ESG investing have continued. Couching

160


Why Business Leaders Must Resist the Anti-ESG Movement

their actions as part of an “anti-woke movement.” a few
states pulled funds from high-profile ESG advocates
such as the world's largest asset owner BlackRock. It's part
ofthe larger war on ‘liberal values” that Morningstar ref-
erenced, but it's also the easiest lever to pull—removing
funds from your pension investments is quicker than
passing anti-LGBTQ laws.

And yet, while dealing with withering attacks, Black.
Rock’s ESG business has been, in the words of Bloom-
berg, “soaring despite attacks by the GOP.”® The short
story on why BlackRock and other investors have moved
forward in the face of any uncertainty and vagueness
about how to even define ESG investing is that (1) the
environmental and social forces driving risk to busi-
ness, like climate change, are real and here; and (2) cus-

tomers are still demanding ESG and impact investing
options.

What Business Leaders Should
Consider Going Forward

Clearly, there's a lot going on. Navigating a company's
role in society is one of the great management challenges
of our time. Business leaders should pay close attention
and take away three lessons.

161


Winston

Non't let loud voices keep you from doing
what your business is meant to do

Even as critics of ESG investing get louder, some inves.
tors in conservative regions are pushing back. Pension
fund executives in Kentucky and North Dakota say they
won't pull money from ESG-friendly financial services
firms. And in Indiana and Nebraska, banking associa.
tions are lobbying against GOP-written legislation that
would force them to pull money from any financial insti-

tutions using ESG criteria.”

The banks pushing back on anti-ESG laws are not
seeking medals for philanthropy; they re doing it because
it’s good business. Since environmental and social issues
have sizable material impacts on companies, investors
are legally required to consider them. The pension man-
agers in Kentucky said that not investing with BlackRock
would ‘violate [their] fiduciary duty.”" The numbers are
compelling to support this: A Wharton School of Busi-
ness study estimated that a Texas anti-ESG law had cost
the state $532 million in higher interest payments on
municipal bonds." If states embrace these laws, and po-

tentially cost taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars, it
wont sit well with pensioners.

162


Why Business Leaders Must Resist the Anti-ESG Movement

There are plenty of reasons to be skeptical of ESG funds.
Definitions are not clear, and good metrics on whether
companies selected by these funds are doing well by the
planet are hard to come by. But even while a bit of anar-
chy in a new asset class works itself out, investors must
keep offering ESG products and services—their custom-
ers demand it. For example, a few years ago, I spoke at a
conference a big bank held for its private wealth clients.
I remember the meeting's host, the bank’s global head
of wealth management, telling his uber-wealthy clients,
“We surveyed our global customers, and the number
one thing you've asked for is impact investing and ESG.”
That’s an amazing shift in recent years from a normal
focus on maximizing returns, philanthropy, and family
endowment planning.

It’s not just finance that needs to ignore anti-ESG pres-
sure in favor of customer needs. Consumer products and
food companies benefit from marketing to and creat-
ing products for diverse customer segments that want
sustainable options. And going back to those pharmacy
giants again—giving in to state legislatures on reproduc-
tive health care means giving up a large market for people

wanting access to these products.

The bottom line is that politicians angling for more
airtime will not have the best interests of the economy

163


or your business at heart. You have no responsibility 1,
humor them if they are threatening your profits busines.

model, or customers.

You may hate to wade into policy issues,
but you can't avoid It

Companies can’t sit on the sidelines anymore because
well, there are no sidelines. In a transparent world, your
silence will speak volumes. Roughly 70% to 90% of re-
spondents in the 2023 Edelman Trust Barometer said they
“expect CEOs to take a public stand on issues” such as cli-
mate change, discrimination, and the wealth gap."

These are choppy waters to navigate. But for your
stakeholders, your consistency becomes valuable. As the
ousted Disney CEO learned, it’s risky to say you stand for
equity and then stay silent when the government curtails
the rights of many of your employees or customers. Like-
wise, you shouldn't have aggressive carbon-reduction
goals but then lobby against any government action to
reduce emissions or, worse, let your trade associations
do it for you. Take a page from Microsoft’s playbook:
The tech giant reviewed its trade associations for their
climate policies and produced a public report showing

164


Why Business Leaders Must Resist the Anti-ES6 Movement

the disconnect. This is a good example of developing
4 strategy around what some call “corporate political
responsibility.

There's an important corollary lesson on politics: Busi-
nesses need to reevaluate who their allies are. Your con-
nection to å party and its philosophies is no longer just
about tax rates or preferential industry incentives or laws.
As the culture wars have heated up, it's been good for
politicians with populist leanings to attack business—
from all sides. So, assess what will really help your com-
pany and sector move down a more just and net positive
path, to meet your big carbon-reduction goals, and to
protect your vulnerable employees and customers. Work

with those in government who will, in good faith, help

make that happen.

Do the right thing

Don't give in to political leaders who want to slow pro-
gress toward a fair and thriving world, or to bigots who
want to systematically take away people’s fundamental
rights. I know it’s scary. Many of your stakeholders—
customers and employees alike—agree vehemently with
the anger and attacks. But a most-likely larger group,


Winston

especially younger customers and employees, wants you
stand up for marginalized groups and be CONSistent
about your values—even if it's uncomfortable. The new
CEO of Mars, Poul Weihrauch, made the business ang
moral case clear in an interview with the Financial Times
*Companies that back off their social and environmental]

commitments in the face of ‘nonsense political attacks
risk alienating a generation of talent.”

But even if you don't know exactly which group is big-
ger, why not just do what s right? And let me be clear: On
many of these issues, there is a right and a wrong. Com-
panies should continue to fight to protect the rights of
people to love who they want, to give women and people
of color equal rights, and to ensure the ability of our
shared climate to support our very existence.

We absolutely can and should debate the how; for
example, what’s the right policy mix or approach from
business to tackle climate change? But morally, fiscally,
and scientifically, it’s right to act. Full stop. In the past
in this country, forward-thinking businesses have come
out, well ahead of government, in favor of desegregation
(for example, Coke and Pepsi competed to market to and
hire Black Americans in the 1940s), for domestic part-
nership before legal gay marriage, and more. These were
actions to access new markets and new groups of em-

ployees, sure, but were also clearly morally right.

166


Why Business Leaders Must Resist the Anti-ESG Movement

The Courage to Lead

when facing the forces of illogic and intolerance, stand
up and show your employees and other stakeholders that
it's unacceptable for your business, for your values, and
for society. Develop your courage muscle.

Like with all controversies—especially the fabricated
ones—some organizations stand strong, while others run
for the hills. In the battle over the abortion pill, pharmacy
giant Walgreens has made its response clear as mud, ap-
pearing to say it would not sell the pill, then backpedal-
ing (kind of).” This is a legal product that the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has deemed
safe and effective. In the short run, Walgreens may win
some points with GOP politicians and one pool of cus-
tomers, and possibly avoid threatened lawsuits. But what
does the action say to the 63% of women (and 58% of men)
who say abortion should be legal (and could also sue for

access)?!
The anti-ESG investor battle is also creating dividing

lines. As Bloomberg put it recently, Morgan Stanley
is choosing to “double down on ESG” and launched

more funds.” At the same time, fund giant Vanguard

pulled itself out of a global agreement to move its port-
folios to net-zero carbon by 2050. ‘The Vanguard CEO

167


Winston

ently told the Financial Times, We cannot state the
rec |
'ESG] investing is better performance wise than broad

18 ‘ ;
‘ndex-based investing. That’s some weak tea. Especially

since guaranteeing that ESG will outperform, Particu.

larly in å short time frame, IS i par requirement—p,
investment thesis can guarantee it will outperform, and
no other category of investments, like tech or health care,
is really asked to. ESG investing IS about risk Manage-
ment and satisfying customers, not guaranteeing results

Some companies seem to be moving toward a mud.
dled middle ground of what's been called “greenhush-
ing,” or going ahead with your environmental and social
efforts but trying to stay quiet, like a teenager sneaking
in after curfew. A quarter of companies in a new survey
said they would not publicize their climate goals.

The old truism “pick your battles wisely” is always
good advice, but some battles and some rights are worth
fighting for. If you take a stand publicly, you tell your
stakeholders what you value. You can help move public

opinion or bring out the supporters and quiet the crit-
ics. By staying silent, companies miss the opportunity to

gather allies, speak with a larger voice, and build collec-
tive courage.

And wouldn't you rather work for—and lead—a brave
company?

168


Why Business Leaders Must Resist the Anti-ESG Movement

U.S. business leaders are increasingly being exposed to
the culture wars, with company decisions around issues
like DEI, LGBTQ+ rights, abortion, and ESG investing
being attacked by politicians and pundits. Even if leaders
would rather avoid these topics, they have a business and
moral obligation to address them head-on with courage.
Here’s how:

/ Dont let loud voices keep you from doing what
your business is meant to do. You have no respon-
sibility to humor politicians angling for airtime if
they are threatening your profits, business model,
or customers.

/ You may hate to wade into policy issues, but you
can’t avoid it. In a transparent world, your silence

will speak volumes.

/ Dont give in to political leaders who want to slow
progress toward a fair and thriving world, or to
individuals who want to systematically take away

people's fundamental rights.

169


Winston

NOTES

1. Liz Mineo, Top
Whole,” Harvard Ga

Business Execs More Polarized Than Nat;

2. Jon Hale, “Whos Behind the Right's Anti-ESG Campaign?”

Morningstar, October 14, 2022, https://www.morningstar.com
| ble-investing/whos-behind-rights-anti-esg-campaign

3. Elizabeth Blair, "After Protests, Disney CEO Speaks Out
Against Floridas ‘Don’t Say Gay’ Bill,” NPR, March 10, 2022
https://www.npr.org/ 2022/03/08/1085130633/disney-response

florida-bill-dont-say-gay.

4 Mike Schneider, “War of Words Between Disney, Ron DeSantis
Heats Up at Annual Meeting,” HuffPost, April 3, 2023, https://
www.huffpost.com/entry/war-of-words-walt-disney-ron-desantis
n 642b47efe4bOba5d603b8422.

5. Tracy Jan, Jena McGregor, and Meghan Hoyer, "Corporate
America’s $50 Billion Promise,’ Washington Post, August 23,
2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/interactive/2021
/george-floyd-corporate-america-racial-justice/.

6. Linda Qiu, “No, Wokeness' Did Not Cause Silicon Valley
Bank’s Collapse, New York Times, March 15, 2023, https://www
nytimes.com/2023/03/15/us/politics/silicon-valley-bank-collapse
-woke-fact-check.html; Philip Bump, "The Right Offers a Rea-
son Silicon Valley Bank Failed: Wokeness,” Washington Post,
March 13, 2023, https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023
/03/13/silicon-valley-bank-woke-right-wing/.

7. Andy Kessler, “Who Killed Silicon Valley Bank?” Wall Street
gm nal, March 12, 2023, https://www.wsj.com/articles/who-killed
-Si icon-valley-bank-interest-rates-treasury-federal-reserve-ip©

170


Why Business Leaders Must Resist the Anti-ESG Movement

Joan-long-term-bond-capital-securities-startup-jpmorgan-bea r
stearns-lehman-brothers-b9ca2347?mod=e2tw.

8. Ted Jackson, “The Rise of ESG: Where It Is Now and How It

Got Here,” CFO, July 5, 2022, https://www.cfo.com/news/the-rise
of-esg-where-it-is-now-and-how-it-got-here/655022/.

9. Frances Schwartzkopff, “BlackRock’s ESG Fund Business Is
Soaring Despite Attacks by the GOP,” Bloomberg, February 13,
2024, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-02-13
/blackrock-is-global-leader-in-esg-thanks-to-passive-funds.

10. Tim Quinson, “More States Push Back Against GOP’s Anti-
ESG Campaign,’ Bloomberg, February 22, 2023, https://www
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-02-22/more-states-push-back
-on-gop-s-anti-esg-campaign-green-insight; Patrick Temple-West,
“Influential Local US Banks Fight Back Against Republicans’ ESG
Attacks,” Financial Times, February 15, 2023, https://www.ft.com
/content/7d305752-e2ee-420d-8883-6a9a246110f7.

11. Rob Kozlowski, “Amid ESG Backlash, Kentucky Pension Fund
Says It Will Not Divest from BlackRock,” Pensions&Investments,

February 9, 2023, https://www.pionline.com/esg/amid-esg-backlash
-kentucky-pension-fund-says-it-will-not-divest-blackrock.

12. Zack Budryk, “Analysis: State Anti-ESG Laws Could Cost Tax-

payers Hundreds of Millions,” The Hill, January 13, 2023, https://
thehill.com/policy/energy-environment/3812695-analysis-state
-anti-esg-laws-could-cost-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions/.

13. “Edelman Trust Barometer 2023," Edelman, https://www
.edelman.com/trust/2023/trust-barometer.

14. Andrew Edgecliffe-Johnson, “Mars Chief Hits Out at “Nonsense
Attacks on Corporate ESG,” Financial Times, March 19, 2023, https://
www.ft.com/content/15ba3866-b444-4c7a-bb6c-7£187b84be07
‘emailld=eca612d7-f082-4£14-8086-29da8fb88f49&segmentld

=a8cbd258-1d42-1845-7b82-00376a04c08f.

171


bo4ef6d3dcded6; Rebecca Cohen, “Walgreens’ Mixed
å | ‘on Pills Landed It in the Political Crossfire

Messaging on Abort
and Its Clarifications May Not Be Enough to Avoid a Boycott.”

Business Insider, March 7, 2023, https://www.businessinsider.com

jwalgreens-boycott-abortion-pills-clarifies-2023-3fop=1.

16. “Public Opinion on Abortion,” Pew Research Center, May 17
2022, https://www.pewresearch.org/religion/fact-sheet /public

-opinion-on-abortion/.

17. Tim Quinson, “Morgan Stanley Is Doubling Down on
ESG,” Bloomberg, March 7, 2025, https://www.bloomberg.com
/professional/ blog/morgan-stanley-is-doubling-down-on-esg/

18. Chris Flood et al., “Vanguard Chief Defends Decision to Pull
Asset Manager Out of Climate Alliance,” Financial Times, Febru-
ary 21, 2023, https://www.ft.com/content/9dab65dd-64c8-40c0

-aebe-fac4689dcc77.

19. Kathryn Lundstrom, “Fear of Greenwashing Is Forcing Brands
into Greenhushing,” Adweek, February 16, 2023, https://www
adweek.com/brand-marketing/fear-of-greenwashing-is-forcing
-brands-into-greenhushing/.

Adapted from content posted on hbr.org, April 5, 2023 (product 4HO7KOT).

172


About the Contributors

JAMES BAMFORD is a senior adviser at Ankura, where he serves
a global client base across industries on joint venture and
partnership issues. He previously coled the Joint Venture
and Alliance Practice at McKinsey & Company and co-
founded Water Street Partners, which Ankura acquired

in 2020.

DANIEL J. BENJAMIN is a tenured professor with joint appoint-
ments at the UCLA Anderson School of Management and
the Human Genetics Department at the UCLA David

Geffen School of Medicine. He is a cofounder and co-
director of the Social Science Genetic Association Con-
sortium, a multidisciplinary enterprise that provides a
platform for collaboration between geneticists and social
scientists. He is a member of JUST Capital’s External

Expert Committee.

SHISHIR BHARGAVA is a managing director in Ankurass Joint
Venture and Partnership Practice. He serves clients in the
renewables, oil and gas, and industrials sectors on joint

173


About the Contributors

venture transactions and their post-close governanc,

‘ncluding helping company build JV- and partnership
transaction-related capabilities.

THOMAS BREUGEM is a professor at Tilburg University in the
Netherlands and part of the university's Zero Hunger
Lab. He is also a visiting scholar with the Humanitarian

Research Group at INSEAD, a global business school with
campuses in France, singapore, and Abu Dhabi.

JUSTIN L. BROOKE is a former associate in Wachtell, Lipton,

Rosen & Katz's litigation department.

KYLE M. DIAMOND is an associate in Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen

& Katz’s corporate department.

ROBERT G. ECCLES is a visiting professor of management prac-
tice at the University of Oxford 's Said Business School and

the founding chairman of the Sustainability Accounting
Standards Board.

NEETIN GULATI is a senior director in Ankura’s Joint Ven-
ture and Partnership Practice and leads their ESG and
Sustainability Initiative. He advises both privately held
companies and joint ventures on transactions and gover-

nance matters, with a focus on the energy, mining, and
automotive sectors.

174


EEA 000000 SS

Ahout the Contributors

RI HEFFETZ is a professor at the Hebrew University of Jeru-
salem’s Bogen Family Department of Economics and an
associate professor at the Samuel Curtis Johnson Gradu-
ate School of Management, Cornell SC Johnson College

of Business. He is a member of JUST Capital’s External
Expert Committee.

MARY JOHNSTONE-LOUIS is a senior fellow in management prac-
tice at the Said Business School, University of Oxford:
codirector of Oxford s Leading Sustainable Corporations
Programme; and senior associate of Oxford Net Zero. She
has served as a World Economic Forum Global Futures
Council Fellow and is currently chair of the board at B

Lab UK.

MARK R. KRAMER is a former senior lecturer at Harvard Busi-
ness School. He is also a cofounder of the social impact
consulting firm FSG and a partner at the impact invest-
ing hedge fund at Congruence Capital. He is the co-
author with Michael E. Porter of the Harvard Business

Review article “Creating Shared Value.”

JOSHUA KWICINSKI is a managing director in Ankuras Joint
Venture and Partnership Practice. He serves clients on
joint venture transactions and governance matters, with

a focus on the mining, renewable energy, and technology
sectors.

175


About the Contributors

ROBERT LANGAN is a corporate governance academic and
actitioner. He has worked in CEO advisory at Spen.

cer Stuart and as part of Credit Suisse's corporate gov.

ernance team. His research focuses on CEO and board

chair appointments and has been published in leading
management and practitioner journals. He is also a vigit.

ing professor at several universities where he teaches in
MBA and executive MBA programs.

MARKUS MENZ is a professor of strategic management and
dean at the Geneva School of Economics and Manage-

ment, University of Geneva. He is the director of the
Geneva Center for Corporate Governance. His research
focuses on C-suite positions, the design of top man-
agement teams and boards of directors, and corporate

headquarters.

BENEDICTE MONTGOMERY is a knowledge expert and team man-
ager at Boston Consulting Group.

FRANS PANNEKOEK is a former chief operating officer (COO) at
Tony's Chocoloney, a sustainable chocolate brand based in

the Netherlands, and the current COO of Seepje (Soaply)
a sustainable soap brand, also based in the Netherlands.
Additionally, he is an adjunct professor at the TIAS School

for Business and Society in the Netherlands.

176


About the Contributors

DERRICK L. PARKER JR. is a former associate in Wachtell.
Lipton, Rosen & Katz's corporate department.

RASHIK PARMAR is the CEO of the British Computer Society,
focused on creating a diverse IT profession that is com-
petent, ethical, and accountable and working together to
solve today’s biggest societal challenges.

MARC PETERS is an IBM Distinguished Engineer.

MARC W. PFITZER is a senior strategist, entrepreneur, author,

and lecturer.

TRACY PYLE is a managing director in Ankuras Joint Ven-
ture and Partnership Practice. She serves clients on joint
venture transactions and governance matters, with a
focus on the chemicals, industrial, and natural resources

sectors.

VINAY SHANDAL is the head of the North American Climate
and Sustainability Practice at Boston Consulting Group.

GIULIA SICCARDO is the director of the Office of Manufactur-
ing and Energy Supply Chains at the U.S. Department
of Energy and was formerly a partner at McKinsey &

Company.

177


Ahout the Contributors

Company;
stakeholders and shareholders. He also advises
SEVera]

startups bringing new ESG solutions, and a startup j
INCU-

bator, the Creative Destruction Lab.

LEO E. STRINE JR. is of counsel at the law firm of Wach
| a
Lipton, Rosen & Katz. He 1s the Michael L Wachter na
r Dis-

tinguished Fellow at the University of Pennsylvan;
Carey Law School. Previously, he was chief ni p
OI the

Supreme Court of Delaware.

ROBERTO TALLARITA is an assistant professor of law at H
ar-

vard Law School.

LLEWELLY

me: N mi pane is an associate professor at IES
- chool in Barcelona and a visitin

Imperial College Business School Pen

manitarian R
; " esearch Group and its Sustai
ions Initiative. _ ete

TALIA VARLEY i |
Cleveland 6) ey physician lead, advisory services, al
inic Canada, where she is a practicing clini

cian and insi
an ESG insights leader with deep work in S

178


Ahout the Contributors

MICHAEL M. WEINSTEIN served as economics columnist and
member of the editorial board for the New York Times
during the 1990s. Later, he directed grant-making for the
Robin Hood Foundation. He serves as chairman of sev-
eral nonprofits and is on the board of JUST Capital.

ANDREW WINSTON was named third on the Thinkers50 list of
the world’s most influential management thinkers. His
books on sustainable business strategy include Green to
Gold, The Big Pivot, and Net Positive (Harvard Business
Review Press, 2006, 2014, and 2021, respectively).

DAVID YOUNG is a managing director and a senior partner
at Boston Consulting Group and a Henderson Institute
fellow.

LILY ZHENG is a diversity, equity, and inclusion strategist,
consultant, and speaker who works with organizations
to achieve the DEI impact and outcomes they need. They
are the author of DEI Deconstructed.

179


Index

abortion, 155, 158, 167-168
accountability
board members and, 86
data use and, 106
governance and, 121
joint ventures and, 76
responsible systems and,
107-108
separate ESG systems and, 5
for social responsibility,
132-133
activist investors, levers used
by, 116-117
activists and activism, xii—xili
anti-ESG movement, 155-172
chiefs ESG officers and,
28-32
affirmative action, 159
affordable housing, 12-13,
15-16
agency problem, 87-88
agriculture, xvi, 9
cocoa, 135-136, 139-141,
143-144
responsible impact for, 109
sugarcane cutting in, 18-19

AL. See artificial intelligence
(AI)
Alcoa, 74
alienation of actors, in supply
chain, 136-137
alignment
artificial intelligence and,
86-88, 95
governance and, 119
private equity and, 59, 62
Alphabet, 151-152
Altman, Sam, 80, 83, 84, 90
amoral drift, 83-85
Anglo American, 74
Anthropic, 81-82, 83, 86, 88
anti-ESG movement, 155-172
cost of, 162-164
courage to lead and, 167-168
doing the right thing and,
165-166
investing and, 160-161
staying true to your business
and, 162-164
taking a position and,
164-165
what it is, 156-160

181


Index

APG, 52
Apollo Global Management,

48, 56, 58
architecture, of code, 105-106

Ares Capital, 56-57
Ariel Investments, 159
artificial intelligence (AI), 79-97
aligning profit and safety
and, 86-88
catastrophic risk with, 92-94
cognitive distance, 88-91
Manhattan Project for, 94
orthogonality thesis in,
85-86
profit motive and, 82-85
responsible computing and,
99-113
safety with, 86-91
traditional governance, so-
cial good, and, 80-83
auditable outcomes, 108
automobile industry, 10, 11

Bain Capital, 56-57
Bamford, James, 69-77

banking, anti-ESG laws and,
162

Barry Callebaut, 138
Bebchuk, Lucian, 83
Benjamin, Daniel J., 35-43
Ben & Jerry’s, 141
Bhargava, Shishir, 69-77

182

BHP, 76
biases
responsible computing and.
100, 107-108
training about, 126-127
unconscious, 64
BlackRock, 116-117, 161,
162
Blackstone, 48, 50
Bloomberg, 161, 167
boards of directors
classified, 116-117, 119
cognitive distance,
88-91
joint ventures and, 75-76
OpenAlI, 80-82
social responsibility and,
85-86
BoKlok, 4, 12-13, 15-16, 21
BP, 70
Breugem, Thomas, 135-146
Brockman, Greg, 80, 90
Brooke, Justin L., 115-122
business models
integrating ESG into,
4-25
nonprofits and, 148
private equity, 47-48, 50,
58-60
social issues and, 127-128
startups and rethinking,
10-11
Business Roundtable, 82-83


CalPERS, 53, 61-62

capital allocation, 5-7
impact intensity of profits

and, 12-17

carbon emissions, XVI
collaboration on, 143-144
function points and, 105
responsible data centers and,

101-102
carbon impact per employee/
customer/SKU, 109
carbon removals, 152
career development, 41, 42
Carlyle, 48, 56—57, 58-59,
61-62, 64
CarTrawler, 65
catastrophic risk, 92-94
Ceres Investor Network, 62
change
businesses’ role in, 127-128
chief ESG officers in,
32-33
incremental vs. bold, 11
nonprofit partnerships and,
149
Chat GPT, 80-81
chief ESG officers, 27-34
as complement to the C-suite,
30-32
responsibilities of, 32-33
stakeholder interest and,
28-32
strategy and, 29-30

Index

child labor, xvi, 136, 140-141,
143-144
Child Labor Monitoring and
Remediation System
(CLMRS), 144
C.H. Robinson, 27, 29
Cleveland Clinic, 151
coalitions, of nonprofits,
151-152
Coca-Cola, 166
cocoa production, 135-136,
139-141, 143-144. See also
Tony’s Chocolonely
codes of conduct, 72
cognitive distance, 89-91
coinvesting, 53
collaboration, 18-20
at Enel, 19-20
for ESG integration, 55-56
with nonprofits, 149, 151,
153
for product launches, 149
at Tony's Chocolonely, 141,
143-144
commitments
delivering on ESG, 3-4, 24
disconnect between gover-
nance and, 115-122
joint ventures and, 70, 72
long-term, 118
net-zero, 62-63
commodities sourcing, 16-17,
135-146


Index

communication, 66

about supply chains, 139
anti-ESG movement and,

161-165
chief ESG officers and, 29

with investors about strategy,

22-23
by nonprofits, 148

of strategy, 11
supply chains and, 141-142

compensation
fairness in, 38, 39, 40
linking to ESG measures,

119
wealth inequality and, 9-10,
18-19, 64-66
competitive advantage, xv
compliance, Xv
private equity and, 66
responsible systems and,
108
computer code efficiency, 100,
104-106
consistency, in actions, 132-
133, 164
contracts
artificial intelligence and,
92-94
joint ventures and, 72, 73-74
corporate political responsibil-
ity, 164-165
corporate social responsibility
(CSR), xiv, 20-22

184

courage, 167-168
Covid-19 pandemic, 23, 28
credibility, 141-142
crowdsourcing, 19-20
customers
focus groups with, 132-33
justness and, 36-43

data
decision-making and, xix
negative externalities and,
xVi-XVII
responsible, 100, 106-107
responsible data centers and
100, 101-102
standardizing ESG, 60-62
strategy and, xx
supply chains and, 141-142
transparency and, 57-58
decision-making, xix
board dynamics and, 91
impact intensity of profits
and, 12-17
integrating ESG into,
3-7
scrutiny on, 86
social responsibility and,
130-131, 132-133
Diamond, Kyle M., 115-122
Discovery, 4, 8-9
Disney. See Walt Disney
Company

)


diversity, equity, and inclusion

(DEI), 63-64

anti-ESG movement and,
157-160

doing the right thing and, 166

initiatives in, 130-131

organizational mission and
values and, 129-130

performative, 127
safety net resources and pro-
tections and, 128-129

Dow, 76
due diligence
ESG questionnaire in, 54-55

integrating ESG in, 55-57
joint ventures and, 71-72

ECAM, 139
Eccles, Robert G., 47-67
Edelman Trust Barometer, 126,
164
efficiency footprint, 102
electric vehicles, 10, 11, 20
employee resource groups
(ERGs), 131
employees
diversity and, 63-64
fair treatment of, 35-42
focus groups with, 132-133
level of interest of in ESG, 28

responsible computing and,
110-111

Index

safety net resources and pro-
tections and, 128-129
shared ownership and, 65-66
Enel, 4, 12, 14, 16
collaboration at, 19-20

investor communication at,
22-23

organizational roles at, 21
energy use, responsible data

centers and, 101-102

Environmental Defense Fund,
71

environmental issues, xiii
governance and, 115-122
identifying impacts on, xx
innovation and, xvii-xviii
joint ventures and, 73-74
justness and, 36-43

responsible computing and,
100-104

EQT Partners, 48, 56-57,
63-64
ERGs. See employee resource
groups (ERGs)
ESG
chiefs ESG officers for, 27-34
definition, xiii-xv, 116
identifying issues material to
your company, 7-10
integrating into your busi-
ness model, 4-25
issues that matter to people,
35-43

185

—EE ——


Index

SG (continued)
joint ventures and, 69-77

movement against, 155-172

targets and financial
performance, 3-25
ESG Data Convergence Pro)-
ect, 61-62
ethics, 165-166
ExxonMobil, 6, 7-8, 70, 120
externalities, negative, Xvi-xVil

Fairtrade certification, 139
financial performance, xii,
3-25
aligning with safety, 86-88
collaboration to avoid trade-
offs on, 18-20
ESG investing and, 162-164
ESG material issues and,
7-10
governance and, 81-82, 83-85
impact intensity optimiza-
tion and, 12-17
integrating ESG goals and, 4
private equity and, 49-50,
51-54
separating ESG performance
from, 5-7
supply chains and, 137-139
Florida, anti-ESG movement
in, 157-158, 159-160
Floyd, George, 159

186

food industry
material ESG issues in,
9-10
negative externalities in,
Xvi
Nestlé, 12
operational footprint in,
16-17
product design in, 13-14
Tyson Foods, 6
food waste, xvi
Frontier, 151-152
function points, 105

general partners, in private
equity, 49, 51-65
Generation Investment Man-
agement, 56-57
Glasgow Financial Alliance for
Net Zero, 62
Global Private Equity Initia-
tive, 52
goals and targets, 3-25
artificial intelligence and,
85-86
balancing elements in, 31
business realities and, 6-7
claims about progress
toward, 4
identifying material ESG
issues and, 7-10
joint ventures and, 69-77


net-zero commitments,

62-63
orthogonality thesis on,
85-86
Goldman Sachs, 147
governance, xili, XX
Aland, 79-97
aligning profit and safety
with, 86-88
catastrophic risk and, 92-94
cognitive distance, 88-91
for data, 106-107
direct democracy approaches
to, 116-118
focusing on, 115-122
joint ventures and, 72, 75-76
JUST rankings of, 38-42
orthogonality thesis in, 85-86
private equity and, 47-48
profit motive and, 82-85
social good and, 80-83
Great Resignation, 28
greenhouse gas emissions
food industry and, xvi, 6
joint ventures and, 71-72
operational footprint and,
13, 16-17
per computing hardware
unit, 103
greenhushing, 168
greenwashing, 4
groupthink, 89-90
Gulati, Neetin, 69-77

Index

Hart, Oliver, 83-84
health impacts

abortion rights and, 158
food industry and, xvi
incentivizing healthy behav-
ior and, 8-9
level of care about, 41, 42
safety net resources and pro-
tections and, 128-129
Heffetz, Ori, 35-43
housing, affordable, 12-13,
15-16
human rights, 71-72
Human Rights Watch, 72

IBM, 99, 100

iCI. See Initiative Climat Inter-
national (iCI)

ICI. See International Cocoa
Initiative (ICI)

IG4 Capital, 56-57

Iger, Bob, 158

IKEA, 12-13

impact intensity of profits,
12-17

infrastructure, 100, 101-102,
103-104

Initiative Climat International
(iCI), 62-63

initiatives, aligning with val-
ues, 130-131

innovation, xvii-xvili, xix

187


Index

Institutional Investors Group

on Climate Change, 62
‘tutional Limited Partners

Association, 53, 62

Inst

integration
of ESG in business models,
4-25
by leaders of ESG, 55-97
International Cocoa Initiative

(ICI), 141, 144
International Energy Agency
(IEA), 101
International Sustainability
Standards Board, 7, 71
International Telecommunica-
tion Union, 103
Investindustrial, 56-57, 60
investors and investing, 11
alignment problem and,
87-88
anti-ESG movement
and, 160-161, 162-164,
167-168
coinvesting and, 53
ESG-based, 160-161,
162-164
governance and, 116-122
insulation from, 85-86
private equity firms, 47-67
strategy and, 22-23

sustainable wealth creation
and, 119-120

188

jobs creation, 38, 39, 40
Johnstone-Louis, Mary,
xi-xxii
joint ventures, 69-77
contractual terms and, 72
73-74
due diligence and, 72
governance and, 72, 75-76
increased scrutiny on,
70-72
Jones, Paul Tudor, 36
JPMorgan Chase, 159
JUST Capital, 36-42, 147
justness, 36-42

safety net resources and pro-
tections and, 128-129

key performance indicators
(KPIs), xiv, xv
for code, 105-106
for computing impact,
108-109
for data, 106-107

for responsible data centers,
101-102

for responsible infrastruc-
ture, 103-104
standardizing, 60-62
transparency and, 57-58
KKR, 48, 57, 62, 65
Kramer, Mark R., 3-25
Kwicinski, Joshua, 69-77


Langan, Robert, 27-34
leaders and leadership
AI, governance, and, 81-83
anti-ESG movement and,
155-172
chief ESG officers, 27-34
communication about ESG
by, 66
courage and, 167-168
in ESG, characteristics of,
54-60
proactivity around social
issues and, 125-134
responsible computing and,
110-111
trust in, 126
understanding ESG and,
Xi-XX1l
learning, 60
Lee, Kewsong, 64
LGBTQ+ rights, 157-158
limited partners, in private
equity, 49, 51-55, 58, 59,
60-62, 64-66
Lockheed Martin, 71
Locust Project, 150
Lowe's, 159

manage-to-the-market provi-
sions, 116-117

market gaps, 151-152

Mars Wrigley, 4, 9-10, 166

Operational footprint of.
16-17

Organizational roles at, 2]
Mastercard, 22
McKinsey & Company, 151-152
Menz, Markus, 27-34
Meta, 151-152
metrics, xiii-xiv, xv, xvi-xvii,
XIX
claims about progress and, 4
complexity of, 31
disconnection of from re-
porting, 7
Microsoft, 80-81, 84, 164-165
mining, 70, 74, 76
mission, 129-131
nonprofits and, 150-151
Montgomery, Bénédicte, 47-67
MorganStanley, 167
Morningstar, 120, 157, 161

negative externalities, xvi-xvii

Nestlé, 4, 12, 144
investor communication at,

22
joint ventures with, 71
product design at, 13-14
net-zero commitments, 62-63

NGOs, 18-20, 138, 144, 148,
150-151


Index

nonprofits, partnering with,
147-154

market gaps and, 151-152

for product launches, 149

with your nonprofit arm,

149-151
Nonprofits source, 149

nutraceuticals, 14
Nuveen, 53, 59

OpenAl, 80, 83, 86, 88
boardroom conflict at, 80-81
cognitive distance and, 90-91

profit motive at, 84
OpenAl, Inc., 80-81
Open Innovability platform,
19-20
operational footprint, 13, 16-17
opportunities
chief ESG officers and, 33
with ESG performance and
profitability, 5-7
incremental change vs., 11
for innovation, xvii-xviii
organizational roles
chief ESG officers, 27-34
IT, 110-111

nonprofit partnerships and,
149-15]

strategy and, 20-22

orthogonality thesis, 85-86
Ownership Works, 65

190

PAI Partners, 57

Pannekoek, Frans, 135-14g

Paris Agreement, on Climate
change, 4, 7, 62-63

carbon removal market and
152 |

ExxonMobil and, 6
Parker, Derrick L., Jr.,
115-122
Parmar, Rashik, 99-113
partnerships
with nonprofits, 147-154
with stakeholders, 20
PBCs. See public benefit COrpo-

rations (PBCs)
pension funds, 162
APG, 52
PGGM, 52-53
PSP Investments, 55
Pepsi, 166
performance

improving ESG, 58-60
organizational roles and,
20-22
private equity and, 47-48
separate systems for judging,
2-7
Peters, Marc, 99-113
Pfitzer, Marc W., 3-25
PGGM, 52-53
pharmaceutical industry, 158,
163, 167
plastic footprint, 104


Index

poison pills, 116-117 PSP Investments, 55
political parties public benefit corporations
anti-ESG movement and, (PBCs), 82, 119, 152
155-172 Pyle, Tracy, 69-77
ESG issues they care about,
40, 41
portfolio management, 55, racism, 159-160
58-60 ratings, xiii-xiv
Principles for Responsible In- ExxonMobil, 6
vestment (PRI), 51, 62 JUST, 36-43

privacy, of data, 100, 106-107
private equity firms, 47-67
ESG integration and, 55-57
ESG performance improve-
ment and, 58-60

forces pushing ESG in, 51-53

Morningstar, 120

shaping, xix

weighting systems in, 42
regulatory issues, xi-xii

joint ventures and, 71-72

responsible systems and,

general partners and, 49, 108
51-65 reporting, xi-xii, xv
initiatives for, 60-66 chief ESG officers and, 29
leaders in, characteristics of, claims about progress
54-60 and, 4
limited partners and, 49, disconnection of from met-
51-55, 58, 59, 60-62, rics, 7
64-66 focus on strategy vs., 10-11
portfolio management and, joint ventures and, 70,
55, 58-60 71-72
power of, 48-49 policy, program, and
transparency and, 55, 57-58 performance in, 57-58
wealth inequality and, 64-66 standardizing, 60-62
product access, 12, 15-16 transparency in, 55, 57-58
product design, 13-15 residual rights of control,
product launches, 149 93-94 i
Project Black, 159 resilience, xvii

191


Index

responsible computing, 99-1 13

«ode efficiency and, 100,
104-106

data and, 100, 106-107

data centers and, 100, 101-102

impact and, 100, 108-109
infrastructure and, 100,

103-104
moving forward with,

110-111
systems and, 100, 107-108

Responsible Data Maturity
Model, 106-107
rewards and incentives
aligning with ESG goals,
21-22
alignment problem and,
87-88
at Discovery, 8-9
responsible computing and,
11]
risk, xii
catastrophic, 92-94
negative externalities and,
XVI-XVII
Rockefeller Asset Management,
71

Royal Caribbean, 27, 31

SABIG, 70-71, 76

safety net resources and pro-
tections, 128-129

192

say-on-pay votes, 116-117,
119

security, of function points,
105-106
Semtech, 29-30
Serafeim, George, 53
Shandal, Vinay, 47-67
shared ownership, 65-66
Shell, 70
Shopify, 151-152
Siccardo, Giulia, 147-154
Siemens, 70-71
Silicon Valley Bank,
159-160
Simpson, Bruce, 147-154
Skanska, 12-13, 16, 21
social issues, responding to,
125-134
social responsibility
anti-ESG movement and,
155-172
business practices and,
139-141
consistency in, 132-133
initiatives and, 130-131
partnering with nonprofits
and, 147-154
proactivity on social issues
and, 125-134
safety net resources
and protections and,
128-129
supply chains and, 135-146


eocietal impacts, XIili, XVii-xviii

| AI, governance, and, 80-83

artificial intelligence and,
85-88

collaboration to avoid trade-
offs on, 18-20

governance and, 115-122

identifying, xx, 7-10

justness and, 36-43

proactivity around, 125-134

profit and, 7-10

responsible computing and,
99-113

supply chains and, 135-146

stakeholders

AT alignment problem and,
87-88

autonomy of, 131

awareness of ESG and,
Xii-Xili

balancing needs of, 121

collaboration with to avoid
trade-offs, 18-20

data sharing with, 142

in DEI strategy, 129-130

doing the right thing and,
165-166

ESG issues that matter most
to, 35-43

in governance, 82-83

joint ventures and, 71

nonprofits communication

with, 148

Social ‘sponsibility account.
ability and, 132-133
Startups, 10-1]

State Street, 116-117
stockholder primacy, 116
Strategy, xv-xviii, xx
Chief ESG officers and, 29-30
DEI, 129-130
ESG issues that matter most
to people and, 35-43
focus on reporting vs., 10-1]
identifying material ESG is-
sues and, 7-10
investors and, 22-23
organizational roles and,
20-22
profits impact intensity opti-
mization and, 12-17
targets, financial

performance, and, 3-25
Strine, Leo E., Jr., 115-122
Stripe, 151-152
sugarcane cutting, 18-19
Summers, Larry, 90
supply chains, 135-146

alienation of actors in,

135-146

collaboration in, 143-144
data sharing in, 141-142
diversity in, 159
fragmented, 136-137
Mars Wrigley, 9-10

193


Index

supply chains (continued)
operational footprint and,
16-17
partnerships in, 137-139
resonating, 137
responsible business prac-
tices and, 139-141
responsible computing and,
110-111
tracking in, 140, 142
Supreme Court, 159
sustainability, xiv-xv
anti-ESG movement and, 157
building into your business, 4
as compliance issue, 5-7
integrating into operations,
20-22
joint ventures and, 71-72
at Mars Wrigley, 16-17
private equity and, 47-67
in wealth creation, 117-118,
119-120

Sustainability Accounting
Standards Board, 57

Sustainable Development
Goals. See United Nations

Sustainable Development
Goals

Tallarita, Roberto, 79-97

targets. See goals and targets
Taylor, Bret, 90

194

technology
artificial intelligence,
79-97
responsible computing and.
99-113
Tenneco, 30
Tesla, 10
Thomas, Llewellyn D.W.,
99-113
Thomson Reuters Refinitiv, 3]
time horizons, 51-54, 118
Tomorrow.io, 150
Tomorrow Locust Project, 150
TomorrowNow.org, 150
Tony's Chocolonely, 137, 138-
139, 144. See also cocoa
production
collaboration at, 143-144
data sharing by, 142

sourcing principles of,
140-141

TotalEnergies, 70

TowerBrook, 57, 65
TPG, 48

trade-offs, xvi, 35-43
collaboration to avoid,
18-20
training, 56-57
transparency, xi-xii. See also
reporting
data and, 100, 106-107

private equity and, 55,
57-58


in supply chains, 138-139
in systems, 107-108

trust, 149
collaboration and, 20

in CEOs, 126
in societal institutions, 126
Tyson Foods, 6, 14-15

UGI Corporation, 29
United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals, 4, 7,
59
Enel and, 23

responsible computing and,
108-109

Vale, 74
value creation, xvii, xx, 11
values
anti-ESG movement and,
157-168
artificial intelligence and,
86-88
codifying and operational-
izing, 129-130
initiatives and, 130-131
nonprofit partnerships and,
150-151

responsible computing and,
99

Index

Vanguard, 116-117, 167-168
Van Wassenhove, Luk N.,
135-146

Varley, Talia, 147-154
Verdane, 57

Verizon, 27, 29, 31

Walgreens, 167
Walmart, 159

Walt Disney Company, 71,
157-158, 164
Washington State Investment
Board, 64
waste, xiii, 39
food, xvi
responsible computing and,
104
water footprint, 102
wealth inequality, 9-10,
64-66
sugarcane cutting and,
18-19
sustainable wealth creation
vs., 117-118, 119-120
weather and climate security,
150
Weihrauch, Poul, 166
Weinstein, Michael M.,
35-43
Winston, Andrew, 155-172
withhold votes, 116-117,
119


Index

work-life balance, 41, 42 Young, David, 47-67

World Benchmarking Alliance,

3-4
World Economic Forum, Zheng, Lily, 125-134
31, 82 Zingales, Luigi, 83-84

196


US$22.95 MANAGEMENT

MOVE PAST THE ESG CULTURE WARS AND MAKE
BETTER CHOICES FOR YOUR BUSINESS.

Embracing ESG—environmental, social, and governance goals—isn t Just the
right thing to do. It’s good business. Companies that don’t address their
material long-term risks may save a few dollars today, but they're putting
themselves, their stakeholders, and their investors in jeopardy.

ESG: The Insights You Need from Harvard Business Review will help you move
past the noise and political debates to execute an ESG strategy that best fits
your business. You'll discover how to link ESG targets to financial performance,
when and how to respond to social issues, and where governance needs to
adapt to meet a changing world.

Business is changing. Will you adapt or be left behind?

Get up to speed and deepen your understanding of the topics that are shaping
your company’s future with the Insights You Need from Harvard Business
Review series. Featuring HBR’s smartest thinking on fast-moving issues—
blockchain, cybersecurity, Al, and more—each book provides the foundational
introduction and practical case studies your organization needs to compete
today and collects the best research, interviews, and analysis to get it ready

for tomorrow.

You can’t afford to ignore how these issues will transform the landscape of
business and society. The Insights You Need series will help you grasp these
critical ideas—and prepare you and your company for the future.

SBN-13: 978-1-64782-690-1

| | 90000
90

9°78 1647'826901 |
EE

HBR.ORG


