
A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer


Å Translation Theory of
Knowledge Transfer

Learning across Organizational Borders

Kjell Arne Røvik


OXFORD

UNIVERSITY PRESS

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom

Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship,

and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries

© Kjell Arne Rovik 2023
The moral rights of the author have been asserted

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above

You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer

Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 2022950958
ISBN 978-0-19-883236-2
DOI: 10.1093/0s0/9780198832362.001.0001

Printed and bound in the UK by
Clays Ltd, Elcograf S.p.A.

Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.


Preface

An obvious but often downplayed point in the research literature is that the
antecedent of innovations in organizations is the capacity to imitate and
learn from other organizations. So, what is the content of this capacity? Why
do some organizations often succeed while others often fail to transfer and
exploit knowledge from other organizations? These are the key questions that
will be highlighted and answered throughout this book. During the last four
decades, much empirical research and theorizing efforts have been under-
taken to improve our understanding of these knowledge transfer puzzles. This
book develops a fresh reframing and a new theory of the subject, It is a theory
that has the potential to help us better understand and explain variations in
knowledge transfer successes across organizational borders. The theory con-
ceptualizes knowledge transfer between organizations as acts of translations,
resembling the translation of language and texts.

I have attempted to make transparent in the book the step-by-step pro-
cesses through which this new theory has been generated—from the first step,
which is a review of the extensive existing literature on the subject, via the
introduction and use of metaphors and insights extracted from two external
domains of translation studies, and to the generation of an inventory of more

precise arguments and propositions that constitute the translation theory of
knowledge transfer.

The theory that is outlined should be conceived of as a ceiling that I do hope
can serve as a floor for other researchers. It should be interpreted, criticized,
inspire empirical research, be tested and refined—and become the source to
new insights.

I am grateful for comments on the book proposal from three anonymous
OUP reviewers and for comments on earlier drafts from Hege Ander-
sen, Bjorn Tore Blindheim, Joep Cornelissen, Barbara Czarniawska, Hanne
Gabrielsen, Gunnar Gjelstrup, Hanne Foss Hansen, Tor Hernes, Frank Holen,
Erik Juel, Hanne Kathrine Krogstrup, Dag Øyvind Madsen, Søren Obed
Madsen, Turid Moldenæs, Nanna Møller Mortensen, Tor Paulson, Hilde
Marie Pettersen, Trish Reay, David Strang, and Eleanor Westney. Their com-
ments have clearly added to the quality of this work. I offer a special thanks to
James Morrison for providing me with his excellent editing service. Finally,
I express my admiration and thanks to the two most important girls in my
life—my wife Heidi and my daughter, Regine—for still providing me with
discussions, ideas, caring, and love.

i


Contents

Vii
List of Figures

Vili
List of Tables

1. Knowledge Transfer and the Quest for the X Factor 1

I. THE STATE OF THE ART

2. What We Do and Do Not Know: A Review of the a
Knowledge Transfer Literature

Il. IN SEARCH OF ANEW THEORY

3. Antecedents of a Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 67
Ill. THE THEORY

4. Reframing Knowledge Transfer as Acts of Translations 105
5. Revealing the Rules of Knowledge Translation 145

6. Reimagining That Translators and Translations Make a Difference 178

IV. IMPLICATIONS FORKNOWLEDGE TRANSFER PRACTICES

7. Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge
Transfer Practices 213

References 250
Index 299


List of Figures

3.1 Generic model of parallel transfer structures in outer and target domains
3.2 Summing up: Salient features of two source domains

4.1 Knowledge transfers as acts of translation: Overview

5.1 A typology of translation rules: Key concepts and how they are related

7.1 Links between translators' knowledge of contexts and outcomes of

knowledge transfers

77
99
142
177

243


List of Tables

2.1 Summary: Seven reviewed knowledge transfer research fields 59
6.1 Summary: Six cases illustrating the role of translators in knowledge transfers 208

7.1 Appropriate translation rules under various scope conditions 245


1

Knowledge Transfer and the Quest
for the X Factor

Introduction

This book zooms in on the challenges of transferring and sharing knowledge
across organizational borders. Knowledge transfer refers to the processes
through which actors and units exchange, receive, and are influenced by
the experience and knowledge of others, and it can manifest itself through
changes in the knowledge bases or performance of recipients (Argote et al.,
2000; van Wijk et al., 2008). Three observations and one main ambition
have inspired this book. The first observation is the increased importance
of effective knowledge transfer for a wide range of critical organizational
success variables. The second is the observation (actually, a number of obser-
vations) that effective knowledge transfer is very challenging; such processes
sometimes succeed, but they frequently fail. The third observation is that
despite extensive research efforts, we still lack theories with high explanatory
power to account for the huge variations in knowledge transfer successes, as

well as research-based means to guide actors involved in knowledge transfer
processes.

Partly in response to these observations, the aim of this book is to outline
a new theory that (re)conceptualizes knowledge transfer between organiza-
tions as acts of translation, resembling the translation of language and texts.
This theory has the potential to improve our understanding of why knowl-
edge transfer processes sometimes succeed and sometimes fail, and also has
the potential to inform practitioners involved in knowledge transfers about
appropriate actions. The theory points towards translation competence as the
key organizational capacity required in knowledge transfers.

Let us first take a closer look at the three above-mentioned observations.

Knowledge transfer and organizational success

The capacity of an organization to transfer and exploit knowledge from
other organizations is a key to its competitiveness, progress, and survival.

A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer. Kjell Arne Røvik, Oxford University Press. © Kjell Arne Ravik (2023).
DOI: 10.1093/050/9780198832362.003.0001


2 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

This insight sheds light on the complex relation between imitation and inno-

vation (Strang and Meyer, 1993). Although society celebrates the innovating
organization (“the lone genius”) and its inventions (Sevon, 1996; Perry-Smith

’ : ‘ ‘
ization acity to innovate are, j
et al., 2015), newness and an organizations Cap y , in

fact, often linked directly to its capacity to imitate and learn from other
organizations practices and ideas. 7 ur

Knowledge transfer capacity affects a number of critical organizational
performance variables, Many studies have found that the capacity to identify,
transfer, and exploit knowledge from other organizations is an antecedent
and key input for a focal organization’s capacity to innovate and improve
performances (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990; Song et al., 2018). For example, it
has been shown that knowledge search and transfer capacity has been a pre-
requisite for focal organizations’ development of new technology (Santoro
et al., 2017; Flor et al., 2018), new products (Alexander and Childe, 2013),
new patents (Zeng et al., 2019), and has led to improved overall organiza-
tional performance, such as increased returns on investments (Patel, et al,
2015) and sales growth (Kohtamåki et al., 2019). The connection between
knowledge transfer and competitiveness is often illustrated with reference to
the expansion of large multinational corporations, a phenomenon that largely
reflects how knowledge can be transferred relatively smoothly across borders
within such organizations, which regularly creates huge competitive advan-
tages (Westney, 1993; Zander and Kogut, 1995; Jensen and Szulanski, 2004;
Riusala and Smale, 2007).

Other studies have indicated that knowledge transfer capacity even affects
organizational survival rates. For example, Agarwal et al. (2004) found
that among entrepreneurial ventures, spin-out organizations (entrepreneurial
ventures of ex-employees in parent organizations) had an edge over other
entrants in terms of survival, which reflected the existence of corridors of
knowledge transfers from the parent organizations to the spin-outs. Winter
et al. (2012) studied a group of franchising organizations and the extent
to which they were able to transfer and replicate exactly knowledge from
their parent organization (the franchisor) about the franchising concept.
The authors found that the franchising organizations that most accurately
transferred and replicated the franchising concept had significantly higher
chances of staying in business and surviving than those franchisees that were
less accurate. Tavares (2020) studied organizational survival among 24.163
newly created establishments (spin-outs) from preestablished parent firms
in Portugal from 2003 to 2008. The parent firms had the option of transfer-
ring workers from the parent organization to the new establishments. The
study showed a significantly higher survival rate among establishments with


i ill am I — = =

P

Knowledge Transfer and the Quest for the X Factor 3

high versus establishments with low levels of employees recruited from the
parent organizations. Tavares interpreted the variations in survival rates as
being mostly caused by variations in knowledge transfer effectiveness. Firm
knowledge, which was embodied in the parent firm workers, was effectively
transferred to the new establishments through internal recruitment of work-
ers from parent firm, thus increasing the establishments’ survival chances.
Ingram and Baum (1997) studied the effects of chain affiliation on individual
hotels in the Manhattan hotel industry from 1890 to 1980. They found that,
under most circumstances, chain afhliation improved the survival chances for
the individual hotels. The researchers ascribed much of this survival effect

to effective transfer of operating knowledge from the chain to the affiliated
component hotels.

Relevance beyond business organizations

Most of the knowledge transfer literature stems from studies of market-
exposed business-firms seeking competitive advantages. In a literature review
of knowledge transfer and organizational learning with relevance to pub-
lic sector organizations, Rashman et al. (2009) concluded that “there is an
over-reliance on the private sector as the principal source of theoretical
understanding and empirical research” and “a tendency to assume by default
that the context was the private sector firm, and that ‘the firm’ is synonymous
with organization” (pp. 486-487). However, knowledge transfers across var-
ious borders are decisive for most types of organizations and have impacts
on a wide range of outcome variables, beyond business firms and their com-
petitive edge. For example, knowledge transfer also includes the transfer of
models of political organizing between nation-states. Efforts to promote and
spread democracy to countries where models and practices of democracy
are insufficient or absent can be conceived of as a giant knowledge trans-
fer project. These efforts are premised on a strong notion that democracy is
the preeminent form of political organizing and governance of nation-states
(Ober, 2008). Although the spread of practices and models of democracy has
along history that can be traced back to the American Revolution of 1776 and
the French Revolution of 1789, the period since the late 1960s has seen a dra-
matic increase in attempts to spread this model to the world’s nation-states
(Whitehead, 1996; O’Loughlin et al., 1998). The so-called “third wave” of
democratization began in Sothern Europe in the early 1970s (Gunther et al.,
1995) and diffused to Latin America in the 1980s (Hagopian and Mainwar-
ing, 2005). The end of the Cold War in 1989 and the disintegration of former


4 Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer
tensive attempts to export

democracy to East European countries (Sehr aeder, 2003). These processeg
were also propelled by the European Union, which demanded democratic
governance in exchange for the East European countries becoming member.
of the European Union (EU) (Olsen, 2002). | | |
However, spreading democracy with the aim of reproducing this idea]
in institutions and governance practices in nation-states—often ones that

have meager democratic traditions—is probably among the most challenging

knowledge transfer processes one can imagine. |
In addition to political organizing, we also have observations of the impor.

tance of transfer and translations of models of administrative organizing for
the shaping of nations-states’ public administration. A seminal work here
is Eleanor Westney’s study of the dramatic transformation of Japan’s public
administration during the Meiji period (1868-1912) (Westney, 1987). These
changes reflected the Meiji leaders’ ambition to modernize the country’s pub-
lic administration, inspired by foreign models and as part of a national project
that aimed to put Japan on equal footing with the West. The Meiji agents sys-
tematically collected information about the practices and the principles of
organizing the postal system, the police, and the press in various Western
countries. Some features of the Western models were selected and then cre-
atively mixed with Japanese bureaucratic traditions. These knowledge—and
translation—processes materialized in a new and radically transformed pub-
lic administration that observers have assessed as being even more modern

than that of its Western counterparts.
Today, many public sector organizations base the development of their

services on benchmarks from other comparable organizations and on trans-
ferred knowledge about good or best practices. An example is the public
education sector, which during the past 25 years has experienced a ratio-
nalized and very powerful knowledge transfer turn that aims to improve
children and students learning performances and achievements. Initiated
and coordinated by strong international actors such as the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the EU, and the IEA
(International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievements),
the rationalized knowledge management system comprises large-scale orga-
nizing and routinization of the production, distribution, and implementation
of knowledge about effective educational practices (Rovik, 2014). This sys-
tem entails regular international surveys (such as the Pisa test) that offer
big data on matters such as the learning environment and students’ per-
formances in various subjects. It also includes the use of clearing houses,
which are institutions established for providing evidence-based information

.

Knowledge Transfer and the Quest for the X Factor 5

about the effects of education programs, policies, and interventions, and have
been founded in many Western countries over the last three decades (Slavin,
2008). Clearing houses are designed to identify good educational prac-
tices and to compile, analyze, synthesize, shape, and disseminate evidence-
based knowledge—especially to professionals, politicians, and the media.
The core idea—that public services and practices must be based on identi-
fied, gathered, analyzed, and disseminated knowledge about evidenced best
practices—is now widespread and represented in most public sectors, such
as healthcare (Andersen et al., 2014), social care (Macdonald, 2000), public

transportation (Terry, 2000), and urban policy (Harrison, 2000).

The architecture of knowledge transfers

How can knowledge that is developed and used within certain organizational
contexts be moved to other organizational contexts and lead to desired orga-
nizational outcomes, such as increased competitiveness and survival rates
in business firms, as well as more democratic governed nation-states and
more modern and effective public administrations? Knowledge transfer is
an eclectic concept that covers a lot of variation. However, such variations
are all versions of an underlying common knowledge transfer architecture
that contains five main elements. These are (a) source organizational con-
text, (b) practices and knowledge to be transferred, (c) borders (or barriers)
between source and recipient units, (d) recipient organizational context, and
(e) mediators. These elements, and how they are combined, vary greatly
between different contexts and knowledge transfer processes. For example,
sources and recipients can be separate and independent organizations, as

well as separate but internal units belonging to the same organization. Fur-
ther, the concept of borders entails all kinds of knowledge flow hindrances

between sources and recipients. Knowledge transfer always involves some
kinds of border crossing and friction. Borders are sometimes minor, such
as in processes of intraorganizational knowledge sharing among workers co-
located in one organizational unit (Tell et al., 2017). On the other hand,
interorganizational knowledge transfers between independent organizations
often involve crossing far more challenging borders. The barring effects may
increase with increased geographical, cultural, and institutional distance
between sources and recipients.

Another element that has significant empirical variance is mediators; that
is, those actors involved in transferring knowledge from sources to recip-
ients. Knowledge transfer can be indirect, which means that it is carried


6 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

out by mediators who are distanced both from the source and the recipient
organization (Sahlin-Andersson and Engwall, 2002). Among the typical indi-
rect mediators are consultants (Ostroff, 1999; Wright, 2019), business media
(Barros and Riiling, 2019), academics (Grandi and Grimaldi, 2005), and man-

agement gurus (Collins, 2019). For example, authors of popular management
books are often distant mediators who attempt to convey success formu-
las from certain organizations to a broad audience of potential recipients
(Furusten 1999). Numerous books and articles, most of them published in

the 1970s and 1980s, urge Western organizations to learn from Japanese prac-
tices of management and organizing (Drucker, 1971; Ouchi, 1981; Pascale
and Athos, 1981), while other examples include biographies about famous
leaders and their management principles (Novak, 1986; Isaacson, 2011).

Direct knowledge transfer means that source-based and recipient-based
actors are more involved in the mediation processes. A well-known example
came from the setup of Japanese companies’ subsidiaries in the United States
in the 1980s (Froin et al., 1999). In some of these cases, the Japanese strategy
was to reproduce their management system and production technology with
great exactitude in their American transplants (Pil and MacDufhe, 1999).
To implement this strategy, the Japanese parent organizations staffed the
subsidiaries with a high proportion of Japanese managers and workers who
interacted directly with the American employees and instructed them about
the parent company’s production system (Adler, 1999; Westney and Piekkari,
2020). This often involved linguistically constrained contexts, so the transfer
of knowledge was frequently conducted through nonverbal communication,
such as showing work movements and real-time demonstrations of how
machines and tools should be used (Sunaoshi et al., 2005). The intense effort
of direct knowledge transfer knowledge from the Japanese parent organiza-
tions is undoubtedly an important factor that explains the successes of many
of their subsidiaries in the United States throughout the 1980s and 1990s,
especially within the motor vehicle industry (Helper et al., 1999).

The above examples show that certain knowledge transfers vary greatly

within the overall common architecture of five elements and can thereby offer
very different conditions for transfer processes.

Transfer successes and failures

While knowledge transfers across organizational borders are extremely
important for organizations’ healthiness, they are not at all straightfor-
_ ward processes with predictable outcomes. Two keywords—variations and


Knowledge Transfer and the Quest for the X Factor 7

complexities—sum up insights from a large number of observations of |
knowledge transfer processes. There are many obstacles to effective knowl- |
edge transfer, which can come to expression in huge variations in processes
and outcomes. In fact, knowledge transfer initiatives often succeed, such as
when knowledge is transferred smoothly from a source unit and fully imple-
mented in a recipient unit, sometimes leading to performance improvements
and long-lasting competitive advantages. One of the best known, thoroughly
researched, and frequently cited knowledge transfer successes is related to the
establishment of the above-mentioned Japanese subsidiaries in the United
States during the 1970s and 1980s (Florida and Kenney, 1991; Westney and
Piekkary, 2020). However, a main finding from empirical studies is the huge
variations in processes and outcomes of knowledge transfers across orga-
nizational borders (Gupta and Govindarajan, 1994; 2000; Szulanski, 1996;
Davenport et al., 1998; Alavi and Leidner, 1999; 2001; Dixon, 2000; Bouncken
and Kraus, 2013; Oyemomi et al., 2016; Tell et al., 2017). For example,
Davenport et al. (1998) studied 31 knowledge transfer projects in 24 large
organizations from various industries and based in different countries. They
defined and measured transfers success and failure in relation to four success
indicators: (1) growth in the resources attached to the project (people, money, |
etc.); (2) growth in the volume of knowledge gained and used; (3) survival,
which is the likelihood that the project would survive and become a (more)
enduring organizational initiative; and (4) evidence of financial return stem- |
ming from the transferred knowledge. The researchers classified 18 of the
31 projects as successful. Almost all of the 18 knowledge transfer projects that
were classified as successes fulfilled all four criteria. In some of these cases,
the knowledge transfers led to major organizational transformations. Five of
the 31 projects were classified as failures, while eight projects were at such
an early phase that their outcomes could not be evaluated. Another example:
Tidd and Thuriaux-Alemån (2016) studied the transfer, adoption, and effec-
tiveness of a research-based innovation management—practices in a sample
of 292 organizational units in different industries and countries. Overall, they
found significant variations in adoption and usage rates. They also found that
usage of the innovation management practices was associated with positive

innovation outcomes.
However, knowledge transfer initiatives frequently fail. There are six com-

mon indications of transfer problems and failures in organizations. First,
such problems often manifest themselves as deficient information in focal
(adopting) organizations about potential useful knowledge residing in other
| organizations. Sometimes an organization can identify a desired practice
| in another organization, but is not able to fully understand and codify it


8 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

(Mansfield, 1985; Strang and Still, 2006). I hisisa serious challenge for knowl.
edge transfers, especially in cases where the desired practice is premised
on context-specific and tacit knowledge (Dhanara) et al. 2004). The less an
adopting organization understands the logic behind a well-functioning Prac-
tice in another organization, the more challenging it becomes to recreate the
ractice at home.
P The second expression of problems is cases where transfer of knowledge jg
not initiated, because organizations sometimes do not even discover eminent

practices and knowledge that is already present in their own organization,
For example, in 1992 the American Productivity and Quality Center (APQR)
established the International Benchmarking Clearinghouse (IBM), which is
an organization designed to search for and transfer global best practices
to their prominent and successful member organizations. However, while
searching for global best practices outside their own walls, the member
organizations—which themselves conducted the benchmarking processes in
close cooperation with IBM—were surprised to discover good practices and
their appurtenant knowledge base within their own organizations. The dis-
covery was surprising because this had been a hidden secret for the leaders,
O'Dell and Grayson (1998), who analyzed this case, summed up the lesson
succinctly as follows: “The grass was greener in their own back yard, and they
did not even know it” (p. 5).

A third indication of knowledge transfer problems comes to expression
in slow or reduced speed of transfer processes (Davidson, 1980; Mansfield
and Romeo, 1980). Identified and desired knowledge sometimes move slowly
across organizational borders, and even among members within an organiza-
tional unit (Zander and Kogut, 1995; Prusak, 1997). In a comparative study
of in-house knowledge transfer among a group of IBM member organiza-
tions, Szulanski (1994; 2000) provided evidence for this argument. He found
that even among the best organizations, it took an average of 27 months to
transfer acknowledged and desired knowledge from a part in the organiza-
tion where it was practiced to other parts of the organization. Such findings
also indicate that the notion of high-speed Knowledge transfer within orga-
nizations (for example, within multinational corporations), but not between
them, needs to be problematized and modified.

A fourth manifestation of transfer problems is instances of missing imple-
mentation of transferred knowledge. New knowledge is sometimes discov-
ered, transferred, and even formally adopted by a recipient unit, but then not

materialized in new practices (Drago, 1988; Szulanski, 2000: Griffith et al.,
2005; Li and Hsieh, 2009). Studies of the development, transfer, and usage of

innovations within healthcare (meaning evidenced new knowledge) provide


Knowledge Transfer and the Quest forthe X Factor 9

illuminating examples. From healthcare research comes a rich and almost
constant supply of new, evidenced knowledge about what should be con-
sidered best practices in healthcare. Every year, approximately 10,000 new
randomized trials are included in MEDLINE (Chassin, 1998), which is the
bibliographic database of life sciences and biomedical information. However,
studies have revealed a divide between the supply of evidenced knowl-
edge and practice in healthcare. In the Netherlands and the United States,
approximately 30-40 percent of patients are not treated according to present
scientific evidence (Schuster et al., 1998; Grol, 2001), while approximately
20-25 percent of healthcare practices are assessed as unnecessary and/or
as potentially harmful (Grol and Grimshaw, 2003). A fascinating aspect of
these insights from the healthcare sector is that the professionals do not
change their healthcare practices according to available new knowledge, even
though there are strong professional norms among healthcare personnel to
act rationally and be open-minded to new evidence-based knowledge in their
fields (Ferlie et al., 2005). Such observations of gaps between available knowl-
edge and practice correspond with similar observations in neo-institutional
organization theory about transferred new knowledge and ideas that lead
to change of talk in the recipient organization, but leave core practices
unchanged (Meyer and Rowan, 1977; Brunsson, 1989; Westphal and Zajac,
2001; Bromley and Powell, 2012; Snellman, 2012; Stal and Corvellec, 2018).
Neo-institutional scholars have theorized the logic behind such decoupling |
as one of seeking legitimacy in broad institutional environments by formally ©
adopting new ideas, thus signaling adherence to widely admired values, such —
as science, evidence, and progress, while simultaneously seeking effective-
ness and efficiency by protecting in-house existing and complex practices that
work well from being changed in accordance with the externally legitimized _
ideas (Bromley and Powell, 2012; Boxenbaum and Jonsson, 2017).

A fifth indication of transfer problems stems from observations of inap-
propriate transformations of the transferred practices/knowledge throughout
the transfer processes. Desired practices and the appurtenant knowledge
about them are sometimes transformed during the transfer processes in such
ways that they do not work in the recipient units. This can occur because the
transfer process has led to transformations that have destroyed fine-tuned
inherent causal mechanisms. As mentioned above, Winter et al.s (2012) study
of the spread of a francizing organization illustrates this point. They found
that the units that most accurately replicated the actual franchise concept
had significantly higher chances of succeeding, in the sense of staying in
business, than those units that were less accurate and transformed the con-
cept. In another study, Blakely et al. (1987) researched the dissemination and


fer
10 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Trans

nnovations programs within the education Sector
They found that the more the adopting Organi.
he original programs, the less likely it wag thes
ded. These findings correspond with views known
al. 1991) and their arguments for the neeg
val prototype; when transferring knowle dge

across organizational borders. According to the pg of high fidelity,

altering evidenced knowledge such as a social improvement program is 4

transfer failure that reduces I

DeGarmo, 2011).
The sixth, and probably

ure, is cases where new knowle
and then implemented and mate

the ultimate indication of knowledge transfer fail.
dge is transferred to a recipient organization
rialized in new organizational practices but

does not work and leads to gaps between expected and actual results (Ace-
moglu et al., 2008; Askim et al., 2008; Røvik, 2011; Pyun and Lallemand,
2014). Although such outcomes may sometimes be caused by the above-
mentioned mechanism of low-fidelity transfer, this is only one of several
possible reasons why implemented new knowledge does not work. In fact,
the opposite argument is frequently raised; that is, that transfer failures some-
times are expressions of too little adaptations of what is transferred to the
context of the recipient organization (Cummings and Teng, 2003). Any-
way, the research literature contains numerous observations and analyses of
instances where new and implemented knowledge fails to work in practice
(Pressman and Wildavsky, 1973; Elmore, 1979; Xue et al., 2005; Skogan, 2008;

Ren, 2019).

Simple models—complex processes

As illustrated above, there are huge variations in processes and outcomes
of knowledge transfer efforts. Even more challenging than revealing such
variations is understanding and explaining why they occur. Variations in out-
comes often reflect complexities in transfer processes that are very hard to
trace, theorize, and model. This insight stands in contrast to widely held views
that knowledge transfers are rather simple processes. As stated by Szulan-
ski (2000), current conceptions of knowledge transfers, which also dominate
research, portray such processes as rather straightforward, instantaneous,
and almost costless. A corresponding notion is that difficulties in knowledge
transfers are deviations from what is standard, normal, and expected.


Knowledge Transfer and the Quest forthe X Factor 11

Where do such notions stem from? An important source is the signal-
transmission metaphor. This is somewhat surprising because this metaphor,
which is imported from information theory, has become an underlying
model in most research on knowledge transfer across organizational borders.
This theory, which was initially formulated by Claude Shannon (1948) and
Shannon and Warren Weaver (1949), and detailed and refined in many later
works (Cole, 1993; Pierce, 2012), depicts communication between units as
mainly one-way processes and conceptualizes the basic elements in such pro-
cesses as source (sender), channel, message, noise, and recipient. Shannon
and Weavers theory has informed many research fields, primarily stud-
ies of signal transference in technical systems, but also biology and life
science (Cobb, 2015) and the social sciences (Leydesdorff, 2021). Within
organization theory, it has been widely used to conceptualize and struc-
ture knowledge transfer studies, although often without referring explicitly
to Shannon and Weaver. However, the signal transmission metaphor also
has disadvantages, in that it limits the conceptualization of the complex-
ities of organizational border-crossing knowledge transfer processes. The
technological context within which Shannon and Weaver developed their
ideas—which was telephone companies and concern with the engineering
aspects of electronic communication—has made its mark on the theory, in
the sense that it is more suitable for understanding electric signal transmis-
sion than human communication. Within this theory, knowledge transfers
are mainly conceptualized as one-way directional processes with an active
source and sender (that is, a central broadcasting point that initiates and adds
all the power to the process) and a passive recipient. However, this is an overly
simple conceptualization of knowledge transfer across organizational bor-
ders. For example, it does not account for insights from knowledge transfer
research and especially studies of absorptive capacity, which show that recip-
ient organizations—and not the source—are often the active parts that search
for new knowledge and initiate knowledge transfer processes (Cohen and
Levinthal, 1989; 1990; Song et al., 2018). Further, the insight that recipients
are not passive receivers, but instead are interpretative systems that may reject
and/or transform received knowledge, also complicates simple signal trans-
mission images of knowledge transfer processes. Another feature of the signal
transmission model is the notion of high-speed and almost automatized
one-directional transfer processes from source to recipient. However, sev-

eral knowledge transfer studies depict such processes as much more messy,
time-consuming (Westney, 1987), and laborious (Szulanski, 1996; 2000) for

the involved organizations.


heory of Knowledge Transfer

12 A Translation T |
to the complexities that lead knowl

here are ! | | |
There å deviate severely from simple images of signal tran,

- processes tO )
ved he coordination challenges. A knowledge transfer »

‘on models. One is t |
at ational borders is often better depicted as a complex ecology of loosely
organize

th divergent interests and aims, than as straighy.
| transmission processes. Thus, knowledge transfer
nd often relatively loosely coordinated and thine.
h processes are often driven by various and sh; fin

groups of actors, who may be involved in EE Phases of - transfer
For example, some actors call be source-based en rer | Involved in early
phases, while others are recipient-based and involve in - stages. Increas.
ing the number of involved actors increases the potential for a transfer logic

resembling the “whispering down the lane” game, which increases the likeli.

hood that the transferred knowledge will be distorted (Andersen and Røvik,

2015).
A second source of complexity is knowledge access challenges. An organi-

zation’s motivation to acquire knowledge from external sources is Usually
premised on observations of other organizations successful achievements,
such as their high-quality products and/or high returns. However, a clas-
sic challenge that is pertinent to such situations is revealing the factors and
trajectories underlying other organizations’ achievements; that is, the knowl-
edge and practices that generate the observed results (Røvik, 2014). This ig
sometimes rather easy, but can often be very difficult, especially when the task
is to understand and recreate the causes behind the good and desired prac-
tices (Argote and Ingram, 2000). The secrets of the winners are usually hard
to trace (Rovik, 2002). This often reflects the corresponding (third) challenge
of divergent interests: simply, what a knowledge seeker and potential recipi-
ent organization wants to know about a desired practice, a potential source
organization may want to protect and keep as a secret (Granstrand, 2000).
In addition, potential recipients problems with gaining knowledge some-
times reflect that even source-based actors involved in the performance of the
desired practice are not able themselves to fully overview, understand, and
communicate in precise terms the decisive factors that account for the qual-
ity of the practice (Lippman and Rumelt, 1982). Anyway, knowledge access
problems are a defining feature of knowledge transfer processes and a stable
source of complications, such as slow speed of the transfer, and, correspond-
ingly, to stable high chances for spread of low-fidelity and distorted versions
of desired practices,

Difficulties—or “stickiness” (von Hippel, 1994; Szulanski, 1996; 2000:
Szulanski and Capetta, 2003)—such as those mentioned above, are intrinsic

Cdge
Mis.

organized actors,
forward one-way signa
usually comprise many å

consuming processes. Suc


Knowledge Transfer and the Quest forthe X Factor 13

parts of knowledge transfer processes. They can be identified, analyzed, and
to some extent handled, but never be totally avoided. These are important
reasons Why knowledge transfer processes frequently deviate from simple
images of signal transmission models.

In addition to the dominating signal transmission images, there is also
another important source for the notion of relatively straightforward knowl-
edge transfer processes. These are the widely held popular images that
knowledge transfer is becoming increasingly simple. Such images are often
premised on arguments about an ongoing communication revolution, with
social media and other communication technologies inevitably and inter-
actively connecting people, organizations, and ideas in intense information
flows, leading to an almost unhindered and rapid global distribution and
adoption of knowledge and best practices (Santoro and Bierly, 2006; Turkina
and Van Assche, 2018). However, numerous observations have indicated that
such flows still involve a great deal of friction. For example, many knowl-
edge transfer studies have shown that the most valuable knowledge—that is,
knowledge that constitutes lasting competitive advantages—is often almost
nonmigratory in nature and is the hardest type of knowledge to transfer
and exploit (Hu, 1995; Nonaka and Takeuchi, 1995). Such observations high-
light an important point: to be able to understand and explain variations in
outcomes of knowledge transfer processes, one must first acknowledge that
complexity is an inherent feature of such processes (Szulanski, 2002).

Theories of knowledge transfers

As argued above, the complexities of knowledge transfers lead to variations.
While involved practitioners are tasked with scrutinizing the difficulties and
handling the problems, a main research challenge is to reveal, understand,
and explain the sources to variations. Since the early 1990s there has been a
dramatic increase in research into the role of knowledge for the prosperity of
contemporary organizations. This has spawned a large number of studies of
knowledge-related issues in general, such as knowledge economy (Neef 1997;
Aghion et al., 1998; Adler 2001; Powell and Snellman, 2004), knowledge man-
agement (Alavi and Leidner, 2001; Hislop et al., 2018), knowledge creation
(Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995; Nonaka and Reinmoeller, 2002; von Krogh
et al., 2000), and studies of knowledge transfer across organizational borders
in particular (Nelson and Winter, 1982; Mowery et al., 1996; Szulanski, 1996;
2003; Argote and Ingram, 2000; Gupta and Govindarajan, 2000; Fleming,
2001; Argote, 2015).


14 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

More than three decades of intense research has generated a multitude
of insights. For example, we know much more now than we did 30 years
ago about characteristics of knowledge that are easy versus those that are
harder to transfer. We also have far more insights about factors that facilitate
versus hamper transfer across organizational borders. Overall, the research
has revealed the importance of taking contexts into account in order to

understand outcomes of knowledge transfer processes. Another important
contribution from this research is that it has created (and partly imported

from other disciplines) a multitude of images and concepts that are applied
to understand knowledge transfers, such as knowledge source, encoding,

knowledge repository, channel, knowledge networks, transfer barriers, stick-
iness, and decoding. These conceptualizations have obviously added elements

to the development of a distinct scientific language, which makes it possible
for researchers (and also for practitioners) to communicate more precisely
about knowledge transfer challenges. The next chapter reviews the knowledge

transfer literature in more detail.
However, despite considerable research efforts, a lot remains to be done

when it comes to understanding and explaining causes behind variations
in trajectories and outcomes of knowledge transfer processes. We have still
not seen—and will probably never see—a variable that resembles “the big X

factor”; that is, an independent variable with very high explanatory power
across most organizational contexts and knowledge transfer processes. Most

quantitative designed studies of factors hypothesized to explain variations
in such processes and outcomes have produced relatively modest significant

correlations and explanatory power.
Another feature of the knowledge transfer literature is a shortage of

research-based action or instrumental models; that is, models and insights
that can guide practitioners’ decisions about how to organize and con-
duct knowledge transfer processes (Rovik, 2016; 2019). There are two main
antecedents to this condition. Firstly, it reflects the fact that knowledge trans-
fer research has hitherto been able to explain only a rather small portion of the
variations in outcomes of knowledge transfers. Thus, the lack of answers to
the question of why knowledge transfer processes and outcomes vary trans-
lates into a shortage of research-based answers to the "how to” question; that
is, how to cope with and reduce the variations. Secondly, the shortage of
instrumental models reflects that authors of published knowledge transfer
studies (and of organization and management studies in general) often put
minimal effort into deducing the implications for practice and practition-
ers of their findings (Bartunek and Rynes, 2010). This observation connects
to the intensifying debate regarding how and to what extent organization


Knowledge Transfer and the Quest forthe X Factor 15

and management theory can be relevant for practitioners (Kieser et al., 2015:

Cooren and Seidl, 2020).
Left with the pragmatic ambition of improving understanding and expla-

nations of variations, it is time to revisit the dominant theories of knowledge
transfer. Å striking common feature of the prevailing knowledge transfer
theories is that almost all of them were launched in the burgeoning days
of knowledge transfer studies, two and three decades ago. This includes the
knowledge-based theory of the firm (Kogut and Zander, 1992; 1993); the the-
ory of creation and utilization of knowledge reservoirs (Argote, 1999; Argote
and Ingram, 2000); the theory of knowledge transfer stickiness (Von Hippel,
1994; Szulanski, 1996; 2000); the SECI-theory (socialization, externalization,
combination, and internalization) of knowledge creation and distribution
(Nonaka and Takeuchis (1995); the theory of absorptive capacity, introduced
by Cohen and Levinthal (1989; 1990); network-based theories of knowledge
transfer (Burt, 1992; Nohria et al., 1992; Hansen, 1999); and theories of the
importance of distance between source and recipient organizations, such as
geographical distance (Porter, 1990), cultural distance (Kedia and Bhagat,
1988; Kogut and Singh, 1988), and institutional distance (Kostova, 1999).
Thus, contemporary knowledge transfer research, which is comprehensive
and multifaceted, has, as Thomas Kuhn (1970) put it, the typical character-
istics of being in “a normal science period”; this means a period of regular
work of researchers (such as observing, testing, reporting, and slowly accu-
mulating details) within already settled theories and paradigms. The normal
science period undoubtedly generates streams of new insights, although a
lot of the variation in transfer processes and outcomes remains unexplained.
Thus, one strategy for vitalizing research about knowledge transfer across
organizational units is to retheorize the subject; that is, to reconceptualize
and reframe (Cornelissen et al., 2021) and thereby stimulate new streams of

empirical research.

Toward a translation theory of knowledge transfer

This book develops a translation theory of knowledge transfer, which offers
a reframing and reconceptualization of dominating contemporary under-
standing of knowledge transfer between organizations. The translation the-
ory of knowledge transfer has the potential to explain why the outcomes
of knowledge transfer processes vary so much, as well as the potential to
guide practitioners’ deliberate actions and interventions to improve chances

of successful transfers of knowledge. This theory is inspired by insights


16 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

different schools of thought. One is the “sociology of translation”
alled Scandinavian institutionalism

erges, 1996; Czarniawska and
ch focuses on the translation

from two
(Serres, 1982; Latour, 1986) and the so-c

in organization theory (Czarniawska and Jo

Sevön, 2005; Sahlin and Wedlin, 2008), whi
and transformation of practices and ideas as they travel in time and space.

The second source of inspiration is translation studies (Holmes, 1972; Bass-

nett and Lefevere, 1998; Snell-Hornby, 2006). This interdisciplinary school

of thought, which was established in the early 1970s, is concerned with the
study of communication across various borders; that is, translations at large,

including both literary and nonliterary translations.

Three core arguments

The translation theory of knowledge transfer outlined in this book is founded

on three interconnected arguments:

1. Knowledge transfers between organizational sources and recipients can be

conceptualized as acts of translation.

2. Translation of knowledge (practices an
3. Translations make a difference; the way translations are pe

explain outcomes of knowledge transfer processes.

d ideas) is a rule-based activity.
rformed may

Each of these arguments is outlined briefly below.
Reframing knowledge transfers as acts of translations. Although there are

different forms of organizational theories, a key common feature of most the-
orizing is the (re) conceptualization of various organizational phenomenon

(Cornelissen et al., 2021). A knowledge transfer process can be thought of
and conceptualized as a series of translation acts. Knowledge transfer is a

kind of mediation between a source and a target (recipient) organizational

unit. Attempts to transfer knowledge from source to target units are usu-

ally driven by an ambition to be inspired by or, even more ambitiously, to

recreate certain observed and desired practices and/or results in the target
organization. As an act of translation, knowledge transfer involves two criti-
cal phases. The first phase is de-contextualization, which involves translating a
desired practice in a particular organizational context into an abstract repre-
sentation (for example, images, words and texts). ‘The second critical phase is
-ontextualization, which is the translation from an abstract representation
of a desired practice in a source context to a concrete practice embedded
'n formal structures, cultures, routines, and individual skills in a recipient

Knowledge Transfer and the Quest for the X Factor 17

context. When contextualizing, a translator faces two main concerns, which
are sometimes contradictory. The first is to avoid missing the essentials of
the desired practice in the source context, which, in translational terms, is
an argument for foreignizing. The second is to avoid missing the essentials
of the recipient context and therefore not making the necessary adaptations
that would enable the knowledge construct to fit into this context. This is an
argument for domestication as a translation strategy.

Reframing knowledge transfer as acts of translation involves a strong focus
on the roles of the mediating actors, such as managers, consultants, expa-
triates, repatriates, and ordinary employees. Within the translation theory
frame, such actors are conceptualized as translators. The mediating actors
can be located in the source, in the recipient, or in external organizations.
Within a translation theory frame, such mediating actors are conceived of
as influential translators who are partly involved in identifying and trans-
lating representations of (desired) source practices, and partly involved in
translating images and representations to new practices in recipient units.

Revealing the modes and rules of knowledge translations. While it is well
known that translators regularly shape and put their marks on the trans-
ferred knowledge, less is known about how they do this. Do such translation
processes have any rules and regularities? Based on empirical studies and
inspired by insights from the above-mentioned two schools of thought, I
outline a typology of the translation modes and rules in use in knowledge
transfer processes. The concept of translation mode refers to the specific aim
and strategy that can drive a knowledge transfer process. I identify three
such modes. The first, the reproducing mode, sometimes echoes a deliberate
replication strategy, with organizations aiming for a competitive advantage
by systematically mimicking (adopting and replicating) others’ innovations
or best practices. The second, the modifying mode, is rooted in a pragmatic
approach to knowledge transfer and is characterized by translators’ awareness
of the challenges of balancing competing concerns of replication and adjust-
ment. The third, the radical mode, is expressed in the inclination of translators
to consider themselves relatively unbound by source context versions when
creating recipient versions. Each translation mode is characterized by the

application of specific translation rules, in all four, which refers to more or
less explicit guidelines for the appropriate translation of knowledge.

The conceptualization of the repertoire of translation modes and the
appurtenant rules are central elements in the translation theory of knowledge
transfer.

Reimagining the idea that translators and translations make a difference. A
lot of the research about knowledge transfer across organizational borders is


owledge Transfer

18 A Translation Theory of Kn
(1996) termed a "barrier approach”

s of knowledge from source to recipien;
h as organizational structures, phy åre
1 Sica]
ifferences between s and nations, and so on. Such bere
ledge flows and can be expressed in "gt; . 8

cki.

can block, halt, or distort know ae
ness” which is the failure of new knowledge to fit in with the needs and/or

the problems to be solved in the recipient unit.
knowledge barriers has clearly added to the und,
f-

Research into various
standing of the factors that nfluence knowledge transfers. From a translation
perspective, however, two interrelated characteristics that underlie much of

s remain problematic. The first is the object

the theorizing about barrier
wledge flowing between units. The second ;
S

or “thing” image of the kno =
the transfer image of the knowledge flow. This image of how knowle dge

flows evokes associations to physical objects that are moved between loca.

tions without being transformed. The object image of the knowledge and
the transfer image of the knowledge flows, when combined with a focus on
barriers to flows, may lead to a static approach to understanding variations

in outcomes of knowledge transfer processes. The barriers, rather than the
ways in which practices and ideas are translated during the transfer pro.

cess, are assumed to determine outcomes. As such, the transfer process itself
plays a minor role in understanding outcomes. From a translation perspec-
tive, the flow of knowledge from source to recipient is not just transfer, but
also a two-phased translation process of de-contextualization and contex-
tualization. Permeating this approach is the notion that translation perfor-
mance—that is, how various actors (translators) based on their knowledge

of contexts apply translation rules when de-contextualizing practices and
contextualizing ideas—may be just as decisive for outcomes of knowledge

transfer processes as the effects of researched knowledge barriers. Trans-
lators have the potential to shape and reshape knowledge throughout the

transfer process (Mukhtarov, 2014). Thus, they also have the potential to
cope with and overcome “stickiness,’ or instances where knowledge trans-

fers are hindered by various knowledge barriers (Szulanski, 1996; Szulanski
et al., 2016). For example, stickiness, as an initially perceived mismatch
between a new knowledge construct and a recipient organization, can be
a and transformed into a match, leading to successful adoption
vy re = pet in this book, translators and their translations are
- se ard a explain outcomes of knowledge transfer processes;
— ailures. This implies that we must tap deep into the

processes of translations in order to understand better their logicsan¢

characterized by what Szulanski

distance, d


Knowledge Transfer and the Quest forthe X Factor 19

to show how insights in these logics can be transformed to guidelines for
practitioners involved in knowledge transfers.

Implication for knowledge transfer practice

The translation theory has the potential to not only improve analysis and
understanding of knowledge transfer processes, but also to guide deliber-
ate interventions in such processes. In other words, the theory developed in
this book is also an action-oriented, or instrumental, theory that has implica-
tions for practitioners involved in knowledge transfers. The argument that a
translation theory can guide practitioners’ interventions in knowledge trans-
fer processes rests on the premise presented above, that the way translators
perform translations of practices and ideas may have an important impact on
the outcomes of knowledge transfer processes. Thus, a key concept for under-
standing variations in outcome of knowledge transfer processes is translation
competence. This concept, which will be presented and discussed thoroughly
in Chapter 7 of this book, refers to the involved actors' knowledge about how
to translate practices and ideas to achieve desired ends in knowledge trans-
fers. I argue that there are two critical features of translation competence in
knowledge transfers: (a) the translators’ knowledge of source and recipient
organizational contexts, and (b) the translators’ knowledge of and ability to
apply the most appropriate translation rules under various conditions.

Structure of the book

The book is structured in four main parts and seven chapters. After this intro-
ductory chapter comes Part I, which contains a review of existing knowledge
transfer works (Chapter 2). The review aims to answer two main ques-
tions: (a) What factors are theorized as (possible) explanations of variations
in processes and outcomes of knowledge transfers between organizations‘
(b) What do we know from empirical studies about the theorized factors
explanatory power? In addition to conclusions regarding what we know
about these subjects, Chapter 2 also highlights some important blank spots

in this literature.
Part II (“In Search of a New Theory”) presents and discusses the

antecedents of the translation theory of knowledge transfer. The theory is
constructed on ideas borrowed from fields outside the field of knowledge


20 ATranslati
ources of inspiration for the theory are tr
Ans.

transfer studies. The two main s |
Id established in the early 1970s and concern
e

lation studies (a research fie | |
with literary and nonliterary translations) and the Scandinavian French

school of organizational translation (Chapter 3).
Part III, the main part of the book, presents and elaborates the three ike
e

ents of the theory: Chapter 4 reframes knowledge transfer as act. of
es on two key translation processes: decontexty

Chapter 5 reveals the modes and rules of

-ranslations and develops a typology of three translation modes and foy,
apter 6 outlines and illustrates empirically the third

lators and translations make a difference. The infly
rocesses and outcomes is illustrated through å
each taking place in different contexts: the United

States, Norway, Denmark, China, United Kingdom, and India.
The last part (Part IV) discusses the implications of the theory for practj-

tioners, especially for actors involved in knowledge transfer processes, The
core concept that is outlined and discussed here is translation competence

which refers to actors’ knowledge of and (more) deliberate use of translation
es (Chapter 7). The chapter also focuses on whether and how

argum
translation and concentrat

alization and contextualization.

appurtenant rules. Ch
core argument that trans
ence of translators on P
knowledge transfer cases,

modes and rul
translation competence can be nurtured and organized.


PART I
THE STATE OF THE ART


2
What We Do and Do Not Know

A Review of the Knowledge Transfer Literature

Introduction

As shown in the introductory chapter, knowledge transfer across organiza-
tional units varies considerably in terms of processes and outcomes: There are
successes as well as failures. But what do we know from research about the
expressions of and causes behind such variations? To shed light on this and
related questions, this chapter reviews a broad selection of the knowledge
transfer literature, with attention to how the overall questions of the book
have been addressed and answered in this literature. The translation theory
of knowledge transfer that I outline over the next chapters builds on, extends,
and partly challenges insights from the knowledge transfer literature.

When searching the literature for answers about how and why knowledge
transfers across organizational units vary in processes and outcomes, one
must first recognize that the knowledge transfer literature is huge and multi-
faceted. While there were still relatively few knowledge transfer publications
in the late 1980s, the early 1990s saw an explosion in the interest of this theme,
leading to rapid growth in research and publications. Using queries from var-
ious databases, Kumar and Ganesh (2009) estimated that the total number
of knowledge transfer publications was 145 in 1996, reached 1000 in 2003,
2000 in 2005, and 3000 around 2007. Obviously, the growth in knowledge
transfer research and literature reflects the simultaneous emergence of the
knowledge-based view (KBV) of organizations. Although not a theory, KBV
is a widely shared acknowledgment among researchers and practitioners that
knowledge has become the most strategically important resource of modern
organizations (Barney, 1991; Grant, 1996; Alavi and Leidner, 2001).

Although the literature is multifaceted, it contains a perceivable pattern
in terms of certain main approaches to the question of what are the crit-
ical variables in knowledge transfers. Thus, it is possible to discern seven
relatively distinct research traditions, each embracing a certain approach to
understanding why variations in knowledge transfer processes and outcomes
occur and each with an appurtenant relatively distinct body of literature.

A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer. Kjell Arne Røvik, Oxford University Press. © Kjell Arne Røvik (2023).
DOI: 10.1093/050/9780198832362.003.0002


as A

24 ATranslat

These seven approaches will b
the influence on knowledge t

mal organizational structure, (2)

on Theory of Knowledge Transfer

e referred to as research traditions that stud
ransfer processes and outcomes of (1) for
absorptive capacity, (3) social networks
(4) geographical distance, (5) cultural distance, (6) institutional distance
(7) characteristics of the transferred knowledge. aia |

I review the research literature from each tradition in relation to two main

questions:

) and

- What factors are theorized as (possible) explanations of Variations in
processes and outcomes of knowledge transfers across organizational

borders? | |
. What do we know from empirical studies about their (the theorized

factors’) explanatory power?

I include in the review of each tradition the following: (1) Contributions
widely conceived of as foundational works. (2) Works that have initiated or
reported from central debates and/or controversy issues within the tradition,
(3) Other works that review the traditions’ research literature. (4) High-
quality empirical studies. Although some works cross over two or more of
the seven research traditions, the literature is remarkably tradition-distinct,

I first review each of the research traditions and in the order they are
presented above. I then sum up the state of the art by compiling and com-
paring the traditions. Finally, I point at implications for a translation theory
of knowledge transfer.

Formal organizational structure and knowledge
transfer

Many organizational characteristics may hamper or facilitate knowledge
transfer and sharing across organizational units (Van Wijk et al., 2008). The
transfer literature has concentrated on some certain characteristics: among
these is the effects of the formal organizational structure. The formal struc-
ture constitutes the overall architecture of the organization, as depicted in
organizational charts. The main dimensions of a formal structure are the
vertical structure (the hierarchical coordination system) and the horizontal
structure (the formal specialization in various types and numbers of units
that are located at the same vertical level of the organization) (Gulick, 1937;
Egeberg and Trondal, 2018; Christensen et al., 2020). The general concept of
border, which is frequently referred to in knowledge transfer studies, is often

EE

What We Do and Do Not Know 25

operationalized as boundaries established by formal structures—internally
between units within an organization and externally between independent
organizations. Å common insight within this stream of research is that formal
organizational structure influences upon knowledge transfer processes and
comes to expression in an overarching main pattern where knowledge flows
easily and is shared among members within an organizational unit, while
transfers across formal organizational borders are usually stopped, distorted,
or delayed (Blau and Scott, 1963; Gupta and Govindarajan, 1994; Dougherty
and Corse, 1995; Willem and Buelens, 2009; McEvily et al., 2014; Christensen
et al., 2020). However, although influential, research indicates that formal
organizational structures do not determine knowledge transfer processes.

The three main features of formal organizational structure are formal-
ization, vertical differentiation, and horizontal differentiation. The formal
organizational structure is constituted and constitutive (Hage, 1980; Ranson
et al., 1980), which means that it is more or less deliberately chosen, and that
it is supposed to influence and reduce variations in various organizational
processes, including processes of knowledge transfer and sharing (Rovik
et al., 2021). Here follows a brief review of suggestions and findings about to
what extent and how the three most central elements of formal organization
structure influence processes of knowledge transfer and sharing.

Formalization

Formalization is both a process and a variable. Many attempts to define the
concept as process (for example Hage and Aiken, 1967; Hage, 1975; Schminke
et al., 2000) can be synthesized as follows: Formalization is the process by
which an organizations tasks, rules, routines, and duties are specified and
expressed in written and explicit form. When conceived of as a variable,
formalization refers to the degree to which an organizations tasks, rules, rou-
tines, and duties are formalized (Pertusa-Ortega et. al., 2010), and the degree
to which members de facto behave according to the formalized expectations
(Fredrickson, 1986).

Formalizations is the classic formal structure variable, deliberately
described by Max Weber in his theory of bureaucracy (Weber, 1924). Weber
conceptualized formalization as a key to standardize processes and increase
clarity and predictability on roles and responsibilities. However, assumptions
in the later literature are more negative about the possible effects of formaliza-
tion on knowledge creation, transfer, and sharing. Formal rules are associated
with control, which may restrict the creation and diffusion of knowledge


26 ATranslati
g: Vlaar et al., 2006). In addition, forma

rules are supposed to preprogram tasks and behavior (Schminke et al.. 2001)
thereby limiting degrees of freedom for members to communicate informa]

and to develop and exchange knowledge (chen et al., woes Conversely
absence of formalization is associated with increased flexibility, more infor.

mal and intense interpersonal communication, and improved conditions for
knowledge creation and diffusion (Wang and Ahmed, 2003). Notwithstanq.

ing, the literature also contains arguments in favor of formalization AS Means
tion and diffusion. Formalized rules and routines

e and learning about appropriate ways of han.

dling various tasks and -onditions (Becker, 2004), including creation and
transfer of knowledge (Pertusa-Ortega et. al., 2010). Thus, it is argued that
formalized rules can be conceived of as reservoirs of experience-based learn.
ing, likened genetic material (Nelson and Winter, 1982), and may function
as guidelines for decisions to generate, transfer, and integrate new knowledge

(Feldman and Pentland, 2003; Kern, 2006).
While there is a comprehensive literature on the role of formalization in the

creation of knowledge, there has been much less resear ch interest in clarifying
the extent to which formalization influences upon the transfer of knowledge
across organizational borders. There are some empirical studies of the sub-
ject. However, when seen in comparison, the findings diverge. Consider the
following examples: Forrester (2000) studied how a Japanese and an Ameri-
can automotive firm disseminated product and production innovations from
innovation teams throughout the various units of their organizations. She
found that the U.S. firm lacked a formal dissemination system. The spread
of the innovations was more ad hoc and based on personal and informal
networks. Therefore, the transfer across the whole organizations was rather
random and slow. Contrary, the Japanese automotive firm applied a strictly
organized disseminating system that consisted of a set of formal procedures
for spreading the innovations across the whole organization. In addition,
all units were supposed to adopt the innovations without questions. The
formal transfer procedures led to fast transfer and adoption of the innova-
tions throughout the organization. In another study of factors influencing
the knowledge sharing and entrepreneurial orientation within 232 Canadian
firms, De Clercq et al. (2013) found—contrary to their expectations—that
a high degree of formalization increased trust and moderately facilitated
knowledge sharing across internal organizational units. However, results
from other studies do not confirm the positive effects of formalization on
knowledge transfers: In a study of 146 Taiwanese firms, Chen and Huang
(2007) found that less formalization moderately increased social interaction

(Mintzberg 1979; Von Krogh, 199

are often based on experienc

dt


What We Do and Do Not Know 27

and slightly favored knowledge sharing across organizational borders. In a
study of two large European companies with 13,600 and 15,000 employees,
respectively, Willem and Buelens (2009) found no empirical support for their
proposition that knowledge sharing varied with the degree of formal coordi-
nation. With data from 164 large Spanish firms, Pertusa-Ortega et al. (2009)
studied the influence of a selection of formal structure variables on various
aspects of knowledge performance. One of their hypotheses was that high lev-
els of formalization have a positive association with knowledge performance,
meaning that formalization will improve the dissemination and implementa-
tion of knowledge in processes, products, and services. However, regression
analysis could not confirm their hypothesis.

In conclusion, this means that there are divergent views as well as mixed
empirical findings about the effects of formalization on knowledge transfers
across organizational borders.

Two other concepts—vertical and horizontal differentiation and
integration—are often used in analysis of organizations’ formal struc-
ture architecture. While vertical differentiation and integration refers to the
locus of decision-making authority and the number of layers in the vertical
structure (Pugh et al., 1968), horizontal differentiation and integration
means the formal division of the organization into subunits (Hage, 1965).

Vertical differentiation

The vertical—or hierarchical—dimension of an organization’s formal struc-
ture refers to the numbers of vertical layers in the organization. The vertical
structure can also influence knowledge transfer. Borders between vertical
layers are potential hindrances both for downward and for upward com-
munication (Katz and Kahn, 1978). The common tendency is for members
belonging to the same vertical level to interact and share more information
and knowledge than with members located at other levels (Blau and Scott,
1962; Egeberg and Trondal, 2018). In principle, there are two opposite ways to
intervene in vertical structures—with potential consequences for knowledge
transfers. One is to relayer, which means to increase the number of vertical
layers, for example as means to reduce top leaders’ span of control (Hersey
and Blanchard, 1969). The other is to delayer, that is, to reduce the num-
bers of hierarchical levels and thus compressing the organization's “height”
(Worthy, 1950; Drucker, 1988; Keuning and Opheij, 1994), for example as
means to shorter communication paths (Kettley, 1995) or to make the orga-
nization “leaner” and more effective (Downs, 1995). While relayering may


28 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

-ansfer and sharing, delayering may have the
d of transfer and more knowledge Sharing,

I studies of the effects on knowledg å
| organizational structure, Ip ,

delay and distort knowledge t

opposite effect: increasing Speed Å" ©
Surprisingly, there are few empiricé

transfers of changes in the vertical formal | å
survey of delayering trends in 2964 organizations across MIIEE countries,

Littler et al. (2003) found that while “improving decision-making” was the

main motive behind delayering reforms, improving yr communica-
tion” across vertical layers was å much lower ranked motive. However,

while only 40 percent of the delayered organizations reported that they had
achieved improved decision-making, approximately 60 percent of those who
stated that “improving internal communication” was the motive behind their

delayering efforts reported that they had achieved this objective.
In the research literature, the concept of vertical hierarchical structure

and the concept of centralization are often used rather interchangeably,
Centralization refers to the locus of decision-making authority within an

organization (Van de Ven and Ferry, 1980). High versus low centralization
depends on whether the decision-making power is concentrated at the top
of the hierarchy or distributed to lower levels of the organization. Centra]-
ization is frequently presented as a variable of organization structure and
as a feature of the organization hierarchy (Hall, 1987; Isai, 2002; Willem

and Buelens, 2009; Ciabuschi et al., 2011). This may be a source to con-
fusion because degree of centralization/decentralization in an organization
does not necessarily indicate how its formal hierarchical structure looks like.
However, it is included in the review of this stream of literature since it is

often defined as a structural variable and presented together with other such

variables.
The main suggestion put forward by many researchers is that while the

centralization and concentration of decision-making power at the top of
the hierarchy is supposed to hinder knowledge transfer and sharing, decen-
tralization of such power to local organizational units is likely to have the
opposite effect (Zaltman et al., 1973; Tsai, 2002; Riege, 2005). It has been
argued that centralization means control, which may restrict knowledge
flows (Chen and Huang, 2007), while decentralization means autonomy
and broadened communication channels (Cardinal, 2001). There has been
much research interest in trying to clarify to what extent and how degree
of centralization influence upon transfer and sharing of knowledge. Most
of the hypothesis that drives the research efforts are in favor of decentral-
ization as a suggested source to increased knowledge transfer and sharing.
While centralization may hinder lateral communication and knowledge flow
(Souitaris, 2001), decentralization is supposed to mobilize and involve more


What We Do and Do Not Know 29

Kasper etal, 2008; P ertusa-Ortega et. al., 2010), Notwithstanding, the liter-
ature also contain suggestions in favor of centralized structures as possible
means os speed up knowledge transfer and sharing. For example, centralized
hierarchical authority can be instrumental and a necessary force to facili-
tate knowledge transfer across internal organizational borders. Ghoshal and
Bartlett (1990) argue that lateral knowledge transfer between subsidiaries
in Multinational corporations MNCs can depend on whether headquarters
engage and initiate transfer processes, Especially, the involvement of central-
ized hierarchical authority may be important in phases of implementation of
transferred knowledge (Ciabuschi et al., 2011; Björkman et al., 2012).

As illustrated above, suggestions diverge about the possible effects of cen-
tralization on knowledge transfer—and so do results from empirical studies.
Some studies report no significant effects of centralization/decentralization
on knowledge transfer and sharing (Ghoshal et al., 1994; Frost et al., 2002;
Willem and Buelens, 2009). Others have revealed modest positive effects
of decentralization. Among these are Gupta and Govindarajan (2000), Tsai
(2002), Chen and Huang (2007) and Ciabuschi et al. (2011). For example,
Tsai (2002) studied knowledge transfer in a large multiunit organization
consisting of 24 business units. He found that while centralization had a sig-
nificant negative effect on knowledge transfer and sharing, decentralization,
which facilitated informal lateral relations had a significant positive effect
on the same variable. Ciabuschi et al. (2011) studied 169 dyadic knowledge
transfer projects in 23 MNCs. They revealed that centralization had neg-
ative effects—both on transfer efficiency (speed and cost of transfer) and
on transfer effectiveness (degree to which transferred knowledge are imple-
mented). However, some studies report positive effects of centralization.
Cardinal’s (2001) study of innovativeness in 57 pharmaceutical firms found—
contrary to common suggestions—a modest positive effect of centralized
coordination on firms’ capacity to develop radical innovations. Caimo and
Lomi (2015) studied knowledge transfer and sharing among members of top
management teams and corporate consultants in an international multiunit
industrial group. They found that knowledge embedded in task-advice rela-
tions were unlikely to be transferred and shared across business units—unless
high degree of centralization, that is, the involvement and support from the
central hierarchy of the organization.

In sum, the results from these and other studies support a conclusion
that effective structures for knowledge transfer and sharing are not simply

decentralized or centralized.


n Theory of Knowledge Tra nsfer

30 ATranslatio
nd integration

Horizontal differentiation a

The horizontal differentiation of an organization refers to the aime Of tasks
and how they are organized and performed by a pre ar vi and types of
subunits. A widely held and strong notion is that t : orders etween hor-
izontally organized and more or less autonomous su oe are barriers tha
hinder and limit knowledge transfer and sharing (Ostroft, 1999; Argote et al,
2000; Tsai, 2002; Mohamed et al., 2004; Cordon-Pozo et al., 2006; Gulati,
2007; Christensen and Lægreid, 2008; Willem and Buelens, 2009; Lægreid
and Rykkja, 2015; 2022; Wanberg et al., 2015; Christensen et al., 2016;
Costumato, 2021). Surprisingly, many publications that focus on the chal-
lenges of transferring, sharing, and coordinating across horizontal borders
are not concerned with documenting the eventual barring effects of horizon-

tally organized units. The existence of such effects are often assumed, and
the studies concentrate on researching various means to increase cross-unit

information flows and coordination.
However, there are empirical studies of how horizontally differentiated

structures work—and they tend to paint a nuanced picture of the effects

on knowledge transfer and sharing. Wanberg et al. (2015) studied the influ-

ence of formal horizontal structure and of disciplinary specialization on

members’ knowledge transfer and sharing practices in two communities of
practice (CoPs) within two large multinational construction and engineer-

ing companies. CoPs were designed with members from different divisions
and disciplines and were used as means to encourage knowledge transfer and
sharing across organizational units. The researchers used statistical network-
analyzing techniques to map knowledge-sharing connections within the two
groups. Results showed that, in one CoP, the used channels for sharing
knowledge largely reflected the members’ background from certain organiza-
tional units, while relatively few new channels across units were established.
In contrast, members of the other CoP had developed fine-grained new
unit-crossing transfer and sharing channels—in addition to established intra-
unit channels, which still were used. The researchers concluded like this
“Formal organizational structure does not produce dichotomous outcomes
in which knowledge sharing is siloed or not. Rather, silos must be evalu-
ated in terms of the degree of constrains, which is a continuum” (Wanberg
et al., 2015: 127). Christensen and Lægreid (2008) studied the extent to
which civil servants in Norwegian governmental ministries and agencies
experienced challenges of coordinating across horizontally located organ:
zational units, 1856 civil servants from 18 ministries responded in a survey
and assessed their experiences with cross-unit coordination. Results showed


What We Do and Do Not Know 31

that 38 percent of the respondents reported that the horizontal coordination
between units within their ow policy were “good,” while 47 percent reported
mixed” —and 15 percent reported “bad” experiences. On the average, civil
servants in the ministries are more satisfied with the horizontal coordina-

tion than are their colleagues in agencies. This means that the civil servants
in the ministries, those that normally are responsible for assessing the need
for, and for initiating, cross-unit coordinating efforts, are more satisfied than
their colleagues in the agencies, who normally are those to be “coordinated.”
These and other studies indicate that formal structures that separate between
horizontally located organizational units are semipermeable borders, which
means that they influence processes of knowledge transfer and sharing in
complex ways; neither simply block them nor let them flow unhindered.

As mentioned above, there have been many suggestions, shared by practi-
tioners and students of organizations, that horizontal integration can be an
effective means of increasing and speeding up the flow of knowledge through-
out an organization (Lawrence and Lorsch, 1967; Galbraith, 1973; Ghoshal
and Gratton, 2002). There are, in principle, two ways to increase horizontal
integration. One is to reduce the number of horizontally organized subunits,
either by removing some or by merging two or more of them. Organiza-
tional mergers are often motivated by ambitions of reducing costs and/or
creating values through increased knowledge transfer and sharing (Hunt and
Downing, 1990; Bresman et al., 1999). Horizontal integration is supposed
to speed up knowledge transfer within the integrated organization and is a
main reason for the establishment of multinational corporations (Kogut and
Zander, 1993; Gupta and Govindarajan, 2000; Minbaeva, 2007). However,
studies have observed that the formerly formal borders between previously
separate organizations often still limits knowledge transfers, even after the
mergers. Such observations sometimes reflect that organizational cultures in
the previously separate units are still “alive” after the mergers and deceler-
ate knowledge flows across the old organizational borders (Chatterjee et al.,
1992; Olie, 1994). It can also reflect a lack of trust across the old borders

(Stahl and Sitkin, 2005) or, as Empson (2001) found, that knowledge trans-

fer was hindered by notions among one of the merging units’ members that,
compared to the units they had merged with, their knowledge base differed

fundamentally in terms of quality.
The other main type of horizontally integration is coordinating across

existing borders of subunits. Well-known means for such cross-border coor-
dination are project groups, project teams, and task forces (Lawrence and
Lorsch, 1967; Ghoshal et al., 1994), cross-functional teams (McDonough,

2000; Mohamed et. al., 2004; Majchrzak et al., 2012), communities of practice


32 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

that cross borders between subunits (Carayannis va al., 2011; Wanberg
et al., 2015), hybrids of networks and hierarchy (Lægreid and Rykkja, 2015),
and the organizing of integration roles for boundary-spanners (Nonaka
et al., 2006) and “trans-specialists” (Postrel, 2002; Kim and Anand, 2018),
A number of studies have been motivated by the suggestion that horizontal
integration—of various kinds—will speed up knowledge sharing and trans-
fer. However, findings from empirical research are mixed. For example,
while some studies report significant positive effects on cross-border com-
munication and increased knowledge sharing caused by various horizontal
coordination initiatives (Ghoshal et al., 1994), others reveal only modest
effects (Willem and Buelens, 2009) or report inconsistent findings (Ancona

and Caldwell, 1992).

Absorptive capacity and knowledge tra nsfer

In their 1988 paper on technology transfer, Kedia and Bhagat coined the term
“absorptive capacity.’ However, the construct is widely attributed to Wesley
Cohen and Daniel Levinthal and their three founding papers from the late
1980s/early 1990s (1989; 1990; 1994). They defined absorptive capacity (AC)
as “the ability of a firm to recognize the value of new, external information,
assimilate it, and apply it for commercial ends” (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990:
128). According to Cohen and Levinthal, the AC construct is made up of the
ability to identify, assimilate, and exploit knowledge from various environ-
mental sources. Acknowledging that most innovations in organizations stem
from borrowings from other organizations, Cohen and Levinthal (1990) pre-
sented the absorptive capacity construct as a theory of knowledge transfer
across organizational borders. As such, absorptive capacity is supposed to
be both a barrier and an enabler: While low levels of AC can hinder, high
levels can facilitate knowledge transfers and increase the chances of desired
outcomes. Gupta and Govindarajan (2000) succinctly formulated the belief
in the potential of absorptive capacity to explain variations in outcomes of
knowledge transfers: “Even when exposed to the same environment and even
when there are insignificant differences in the desire to acquire new knowl-
edge, individuals and organizations may differ in their ability to recognize
the value of new information, assimilate it, and apply it to commercial ends
(p. 476),

For more than 30 years, the AC construct has strongly influenced theoret-
ical debates and empirical organizational research—and especially research
on knowledge transfer and innovation (Lane et al., 2006: Song, et. al., 2018;

å
|
q
4
|

What We Do and Do Not Know 33

Zou, et al., 2018). The clearest expression of the influence is the enor-
mous research literature it has generated since it was launched in 1989
(Volberda et al., 2010; Sakhdari, 2016; Apriliyanti and Alon, 2017). Cohen
and Levinthals seminal 1990 paper has been cited more than 46,500 times,
and AC has been the main topic in more than 15,000 articles published in
more than 900 different peer-reviewed journals, As Volberda et al. (2010:
932) noted, the huge and still expanding literature is also an expression of
high absorptive capacity within the field of organizational research itself to
adopt and exploit the relatively new concept. However, despite being widely
held as one of the most promising advances in organizational research, there
is growing scholarly awareness of some serious problems with the AC con-
struct (Lane and Lubatkin, 1998; Lane et al., 2006: Song et al., 2018). The
identified challenges are of two kinds, which are highly interconnected. The
first is ambiguities concerning the antecedents and the content of the con-
struct. The antecedents and content uncertainties feed into the second kind,
which is ambiguities about the effects of absorptive capacity.

Antecedents of absorptive capacity

A fascinating feature of the 30-year history of AC is that, simultaneously with
numerous research reports about the construct's great advantages and docu-
mented effects, a parallel debate has intensified about what AC really is. There
are ambiguities regarding the antecedents of AC, the meaning of the term

“capacity,” and the content of AC and how it works.
Ambiguities of antecedents. The literature contains assumptions about the

antecedents of the AC mechanism that have been expressed with varying
degrees of clarity. A central insight is that organizations are dependent upon
prior related knowledge in order to identify, assimilate, and use new knowl-
edge (Bower and Hilgard, 1981; Cohen and Levinthal, 1990: 129). Therefore,
it is supposed that organizations need to have invested in and be knowl-
edgeable about the domain where the new knowledge emerge in order to
increase the capacity to identify and assimilate it. This insight feeds into two
different assumptions about the nature of AC. One is that the development
of absorptive capacity means accumulation over time of domain-specific
and specialized knowledge (Pavlou and El Sawy, 2006; Roberts et al., 2012).

Thus, AC resembles a radar that becomes increasingly attuned against specific
signals from certain domains while simultaneously leaving out others and

becoming increasingly specialized. However, a contrary assumption is that
developing absorptive capacity means learning how to learn (Estes, 1970),


34 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

which means increasing the capacity to assimilate knowledge from differ.

ent domains: “Unlike learning by doing; which gr im to get better a
what they already do, absorptive capacity allows å —s do some.
thing quite different” (Lane et al., 2006: 836). Due to : EE that Ac
depends on prior related knowledge and that it accumulates over time, it ha,

been hypothesized that AC will vary with an oe ages that is, the
older the organization, the more absorptive capacity the organization accy.

mulates (Rao and Drazin, 2002; Huergo and Jaumandreu, 2004), However,
empirical studies have not been able to verify this hypothesis (Mowery et al,

1996; Zou et al., 2018). dal | |
A second notion is that an organizations absorptive capacity has both

organizational and individual antecedents. The most researched and high-

lighted organizational antecedent is organizations’ research and development
d efforts (Cohen and Levinthal, 1989; Lane et al,

on, the AC literature has identified orga.

nizational routines (Lewin et al., 2011; Chalmers and Balan-Vnuk, 2013),
management characteristics (Volberda et al., 2010), rewards and HRM Sys-
tems (Minbaeva et al., 2014), and certain formal structure arrangements
(Chen and Chang, 2012) as typical organizational antecedents of AC. Cohen
and Levinthal (1989) explicitly stated that organizations absorptive Capacity
also has individual antecedents, which means that the level of AC depends
partly on the individual members’ prior knowledge, memory capacity, and
capacity to discover and make sense of new knowledge emerging in vari-
ous external domains. Based on insights from cognitive theory, Cohen and
Levinthal (1990) argued that the development of an individuals memory and
stock of knowledge is self-reinforcing. When the individual encounters new
knowledge, it can be overlooked, but it can also be recorded into the individ-
ual's memory by creating connections with preexisting, already memorized
concepts and knowledge. However, the interplay between organizational
and individual antecedents of organizations AC is complex, poorly under-
stood, and underresearched (Lane et al., 2001; Foss, 2011; Martinkenaite and
Breunig, 2016; Tian and Soo, 2018).

Asset versus capability. In addition to debates about the antecedents of
absorptive capacity, there are also debates and ambiguities about the term
“capacity. While AC from certain angles appear as an organizational asset, it
is conceived from others as a capability. Conceptualized as an asset, AC refers
to “the level of relevant prior knowledge possessed by the focal unit” (Roberts
et al., 2012: 628). The underlying assumption is that absorptive capacity
equals the stock of knowledge that the organization owns and controls (Helfat


What We Do and Do Not Know 35

and Peteraf, 2003) and which is a function of prior investments in R&D
(Lane et al., 2006).

While the early conceptualizations were influenced by the AC-as-asset
perspective and centered around R&D issues (Gebauer et al., 2012), later con-
tributions have criticized this approach for being static (Roberts et al., 2012).
On the contrary, recent contributions often view AC as a capability; that is,
the extent of an organization’ ability to identify, assimilate, and exploit exter-
nal knowledge. The capability to absorb can be established as sets of routines
for identifying new knowledge and for combining, sharing, processing, and
exploring it (Lewin et al., 2011; Van der Heiden et al., 2016; Enkel et al., 2018).
The quality of absorptive capacity routines varies and depends upon several
factors, such as the appropriateness of the routines in relation to the knowl-
edge absorption challenges, how well the routines are communicated to the
members, and the quality of the training of members in choosing correct

routines and to use them in practice.

In addition to the conceptualization of AC capability as routines, the con-
cept of dynamic capability has been introduced to define key features of an
organization’s absorptive capacity (Zahra and George, 2002; Lichtenthaler
2009). Dynamic capability is defined as the organizations “ability to inte-
grate, build, and reconfigure internal and external competencies to address
rapidly changing environments” (Teece et al., 1997: 515) and as “the capac-
ity of an organization to purposefully create, extend, or modify its resource
base” (Helfat et al., 2007: 4). The dynamic capability view differs from the
asset view in that it stresses the capability that (some) organizations have to
combine and reconfigure their resources and to constantly change and renew

their knowledge base. Thus, the concept “dynamic’ refers to “the capacity to
renew competences so as to achieve congruence with the changing business

environment” (Teece et al., 1997: 515),

The ambiguous contents of absorptive capacity

While many studies have concluded that organizations’ absorptive capacity
is an important source to successful knowledge transfers, there is still a lot of
ambiguity and confusion about the content of AC and how it works. Bluntly,
while many AC studies report positive effects, it often remains unclear exactly
how and to what extent organizations’ absorptive capacity has caused the
effects, The main reason for the ambiguities is the multi-dimensional char-
acter of the AC construct. Cohen and Levinthal (1990) identified three


:
36 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfe

dimensions in their conceptualization of absorptive a pre beg, of
the value of new external knowledge; pers pe " ge, and
exploitation of it for commercial ends. The ambig ne en con.
cern two aspects of the AC construct. The first stem nties about

what dimensions absorptive capacity consists of, while the woe COncerns
uncertainties about how the involved dimensions are interrelated and work

in knowledge absorptive processes.

ee : ions
Uncertainties about the AC dimension | |
There have been many scholarly attempts to revise Cohen and Levinthal’

(1990) original three-dimensional AC construct of recognition, assimila.
tion, and exploitation. The endeavors encompass suggestions for minor
revisions (such as relabeling, clarifications, and elaborations of Cohen and
Levinthal’s conceptualization), as well as major revisions, wee - Introduc-
ing new dimensions and/or withdrawal of other researchers dimensions.
Due to space limitations, this chapter offers only a brief review of suggested
revisions. Heeley (1997) argued for å reconceptualization of the AC con-
struct to encompass the three dimensions of external knowledge acquisition,
intra-organizational knowledge dissemination, and technical competence.
While the first equals Cohen and Levinthal’s concepts of acquisition, the
other two differ in substance compared to Cohen and Levinthal’s concepts
of assimilation and exploitation. Liao et al. (2003) introduced the dimension
of organizational responsiveness as an elaboration and potential substitute of
Cohen and Levinthal’s exploitation dimension. They indirectly criticized the
AC construct for being underdeveloped in terms of how and to what extent
organizations have the capability to act in response to acquired and assimi-
lated knowledge. The most comprehensive and formative revision of the AC
construct was introduced by Zahra and George (2002). In their version of
the construct, they retained Cohen and Levinthals (1990) three dimensions,
but reconceptualized AC to contain two main parts: potential and realized
absorptive capacity. Potential AC encompasses acquisition and assimila-
tion. Realized AC contains two dimensions: transformation and exploitation.
The new dimension that they introduced, transformation, was defined as “a
firms capability to develop and refine the routines that facilitate combin-
ing existing knowledge and the newly acquired and assimilated knowledge
(Zahra and George, 2002: 190). Thus, through transformation, new knowl-
edge can be rejected or assimilated and added to the organizational stock of
knowledge—or it can be transformed in processes where existing knowledge

and acquired knowledge are mixed and subsequently lead to new services!
products,


What We Do and Do Not Know 37

In a widely cited paper, Todorova and Durisin (2007) criticized Zahra and
George for their theorizing about the transformation dimension and their
claim that it is the next step after assimilation. Todorova and Durisin argued
that transformation is an alternative to assimilation, rather than a necessary
next step after it. When new Knowledge fits well into existing knowledge
and cognitive schemes, it has increased chances of being assimilated. In such
cases, there is less need for transformation of the new knowledge. How-
ever, in cases where acquired new knowledge does not resonate well with
the established stock of knowledge and cognitive maps, processes are likely
to be released to transform and modify the new knowledge to establish an
acceptable fit. Thus, according to Todorova and Durisin, assimilation and
transformation are conceived of as alternative dimensions and steps. In a
more recent contribution, Song et al. (2018) argued that an organization’s
absorptive capacity contains three dimensions. The first is absorptive effort,
which refers to investments made by an organization that facilitate search-
ing, identifying, and acquiring external knowledge. The second dimension is
absorptive knowledge base, which refers to the organization’s accumulated
stock of knowledge that facilitate understanding, recombining, and transfor-
mation of external knowledge. The third is absorptive process, which refers
to routines and practices for diffusion and knowledge sharing within an

organization.

The interconnectedness of AC dimensions
As indicated above, it remains unclear what dimensions are involved in gen-

erating organizations absorptive capacity. In addition, it remains unclear |
how the dimensions relate to each other and, thus, how and to what |
extent certain versions of interconnectedness are associated with various lev-

els of absorptive capacity (Camisön and Forés, 2010). Many studies have
assumed a logic of sequentiality in the ways that the dimensions of absorp-
tive capacity are related and activated. For example, Todorova and Durisin
(2007) argued that the relationship between the dimensions assimilation
and transformation follows a sequential order, where assimilation comes
first, and where certain characteristics of the assimilated knowledge deter-
mine whether transformation is activated or not. Zahra and George's (2002)
conceptualization of knowledge acquisition and assimilation as potential
absorptive capacity, and transformation and exploitation as realized absorp-

tive capacity, clearly indicate a logic of sequentiality where the two potential
dimensions predate and forerun the two realized dimensions. However,

this notion of a certain sequence logic contrasts with suggestions in early
AC studies where organizations’ R&D investments and their current stock


38 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

posed to define and predate processes of search
d, these different suggestions indicate tha,
es of action chains across the AC dimen.

sions do not account for the inherent complexities in the ways absorptive
capacity works. Zahra and George (2002) are aware of that: uy argue that
potential and realized AC play separate yet opne y fo ” In the AC
mechanism. For example, this means that a high level of potential AC does
not necessarily lead to innovations, and neither does high levels of realized
AC. This indicates that the AC dimensions are intertwined and connected jp
complex logics of mutual dependency and simultaneity. These logics, which
remains poorly understood, are decisive for how AC works in practice,

The extent to which AC works does not depend solely on the intra.
organizational relatedness of the AC dimensions. Lane and Lubatkin (1998)
introduced an interorganizational perspective on AC and the concept of rela-
tive absorptive capacity. They criticized AC contributions for suggesting that
an organization, by means of its absorptive capacity, has equal opportunities
to gain knowledge and learn from all other organizations. However, Lane and
Lubatkin argued that the ability to identify, transfer, and learn from another
organization's practices and knowledge depends on whether the two orga-
nizations have matching attributes, which refers to the degree of similarity
on variables, such as organizational structure, knowledge base, and knowl-
edge processing routines. The greater the similarity among each of the three
dimensions (acquisition, assimilation, exploitation) of the source and the
knowledge seeking/recipient organization, the more effective the absorptive
capacity of the recipient.

Lane and Lubatkin’s theory of relative absorptive capacity breaks with a
central feature of the AC literature. Although the construct of absorptive
capacity is presented as a theory of how learning and innovations are based
on knowledge transfers from external sources to a focal organization (Cohen
and Levinthal, 1990: 128), most AC studies have focused almost exclusively
on the knowledge seeking/receiving unit. Thus, what is left out is attention
towards how an organizations absorptive capacity is influenced by the exter-
nal source organization(s), features of the knowledge to be transferred, and
the relationships between the source and the knowledge seeking/recipient
units.

of knowledge were sup
and assimilation. When compare
notions of unidirectional sequence

Ambiguities of outcomes

In their first seminal articles, Cohen and Levinthal (1989; 1990) argued that
an organization's level of absorptive capacity is clearly associated with IS
chances of identifying and transferring valuable knowledge from external


What We Do and Do Not Know 39

sources, exploiting it, and achieving desired outcomes. In other words, a

suggestion that the level of absorptive capacity is a key independent variable
to explain variations in outcomes of knowledge transfer processes (Escribano

et al., 2009; Farell et al., 2019). Numerous attempts have been made to trace
AC effects on outcomes of knowledge transfers. In their review of the AC

literature, Song et al. (2018) found that more than 50 outcome measures
have been used in empirical AC studies. Many studies have tried to trace
effects of AC on innovations, using various measures, such as new products
(Stock et al., 2001; Xie et al., 2018), new patents (Fabrizio, 2009), and tech-
nology development (Keller, 1996). In addition, many studies have sought
to reveal the effects of AC on overall organizational performance, such as
sales growth (Kohtamaki et al., 2019), returns on sales and assets (Kostopou-
los et al., 2011), green innovations (Galbreath, 2019), and resilience (Gölgeci
and Kuivalainen, 2020).

Although many studies have reported positive effects of absorptive capac-
ity on outcomes, there are still unresolved puzzles that lead to ambiguities
concerning how and to what extent AC really has effects on various outcome
variables. There are three main reasons for these ambiguities.

The first is ambiguities that stem from the multidimensional character
of the AC construct. It generates two main uncertainties when assessing
research that reports about the effects of AC—summarized in a what and a
how question. The “what” question concerns remaining uncertainties about
what dimensions are actually involved in shaping the absorptive capacity.
The “how” question refers to uncertainties about the interconnectedness of
the dimensions: the logics of the coworking of involved dimensions when
absorptive capacity is generated. When these challenges remain unresolved,
it is partly due to a tendency among researchers to conceive of AC as a unidi-
mensional construct rather than a multidimensional one (Bierly et al., 2009).
According to Lane et al. (2006), this tendency reflects the reification of the AC
construct, which means that it has become taken for granted, and thus, that

researchers “increasingly fail to specify the assumptions that underlie their
use of it” (p. 834).

The second reason for cause-and-effect uncertainties related to absorp-
tive capacity stems from operationalization challenges. Links are sometimes
loose between conceptualizations and operationalizations of this construct.
For example, Mowery et al. (1996) criticized attempts to measure AC in terms
of R&D investments and intensity. In addition, the same measures are some-
times used as indicators of absorptive capacity (cause) in some studies and as
indicators of outcomes (effects) in others. For example, Cohen and Levinthal
(1989) used organizations’ spending on R&D as measure of outcome in their
operationalization of absorptive capacity, while this variable in their theory


was conceived of as a central element of organizations assimilation Capability
an element of potential absorptive Capacity,

(Lane et al., 2006), and thus, | ve it
The third reason why considerable uncertainty remains å out how absorp.
outcomes it generates—can be traced back tg

research methods. While researchers’ efforts to theorize the AC construc
complex processes, survey and quantitative

strive to conceptualize highly | | |
d almost exclusive methods in empirical AC

methods are the dominant an | | 0
ften inappropriate for gaining deeper

research. However, such methods are 0 | |
insights into this construct's sui generis. For example, dynamic capability (the

notion that an organization can develop the ability to “learn how to learn” and
be able to constantly renew its competencies to develop innovations) is a key
concept in the AC literature. In practice, dynamic capability entails extremely
obilization and mixing of organizations’ know].
edge bases, memory systems, individual cognitions, personal skills, etc. Thus

to gain thorough knowledge into these processes, they need to be studied ag
such; that is, by qualitative process study methods. However, as Lichtenthaler

(2009) showed, studies and measures of absorptive capacity as a dynamic
capability are, for the most part, survey-based and quantitative. Easterby-
Smith et al. (2008) stated that the progress of research on AC since 1990 has
been disappointing and that the lack of development mainly “result[s] from
the dominant use of research methods which are more relevant for testing,
rather than developing, theory. If so, then new ideas and perspectives are far
more likely to be added if qualitative methods are used to examine absorptive
capacity” (p. 485). However, some new process-based AC studies have been

published recently, among them Sjédin et al. (2019) and Horvat et al. (2019),

complex processes, such as m

Social networks and knowledge transfers

A third body of literature within knowledge transfer research is social net-
work studies. A central assumption is that characteristics of the social net-
works that connect actors, organizations, and fields can explain variations in
knowledge transfer processes and outcomes. Wasserman and Faust (1994)
defined a social network as “a finite set or sets of actors (e.g. people, organi-
zations or other social entities) and the relation or relations defined on them”
(p. 20). Phelps et al. (2012) provided a more complex conceptualization,
defining a social network as “a set of nodes—individuals or higher level col-
lectives that serve as heterogeneously distributed repositories of knowledge
and agents that search for, transmit, and create knowledge—interconnected
by social relationships that enable and constrain nodes’ efforts to acquiré,
transfer and create knowledge” (p. 1117). The underlying assumption In


What We Do and Do Not Know 41

social network analysis is that the exchange of ideas and knowledge is embed-
ded in social relationships and that such relationships matter in terms of
transfer outcomes (Contractor and Monge, 2002; Kilduff and Brass, 2010).
A key feature of networks is repeated and lasting exchange relationships
between the networks actors (Podolny and Page, 1998) that provide capacity
and capability for knowledge transfer.

Network analysis is an interdisciplinary field that includes very different
disciplines and research agendas, such as macroeconomics and studies of
economic growth (Aghion et al., 1998), demography and studies of changes
in populations (Heckathorn and Cameron, 2017), healthcare and epidemio-
logical studies (Pescosolido and Levy, 2002), and mapping of social structures
in sociology (Parsons, 1951), organization theory (Scott and Davis, 2003) —
and in social anthropology. One of the first researchers to apply network
theory in empirical studies was the British anthropologist J.A. Barnes, who
conducted fieldwork in a small Norwegian fishing village in the early 1950s.
One day, while resting his eyes on a fishing net in a boathouse, the idea struck
him that it visualized the whole social structure of the village he was studying:

The image | have [of the village’s social structure] is of a set of points, some of
which are joined by lines. The points of the image are people, or sometimes groups,
and the lines indicate which people interact with each other... A network of this
kind has no clear externally boundary, nor has it clear-cut internal division, and
certainly there are clusters of people who are more closely knit together than

others.
(Barnes, 1954: 43-44)

This brief review zooms in on insights from the usage of the social network
construct in studies of knowledge transfer across organizational borders. This
large and still expanding stream of publications took off at the turn of the
twenty-first century (Phelps et al., 2012; Marchiori and Franco, 2020). Several
of the most influential publications from this early phase broadly analyzed
how social networks—or “social capital” —are antecedents of organizations
access to knowledge (Granovetter, 1973; Nohria et.al., 1992; Hansen, 1999;
Dyer and Nobeoka; 2000; Tsai, 2001; Adler and Kwon, 2002; Reagans and
McEvily, 2003), and important means for the creation, transfer, and utiliza-
tion of knowledge (Powell et al, 1996; Powell, 1998; Nahapiet and Ghoshal,
1998; Tsai and Ghoshal (1998); Baum et al., 2000; Gupta and Govindarajan,
2000; Lee et al., 2001; Inkpen and Tsang, 2005).

Four capabilities of networks are especially important when assessing
how they may influence knowledge transfer processes across organizational

borders.


A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

earlier than organizations t

transfer channels (Nahapi
(2001) found that early recognition of new ie,
Ow].

2000; Puhakka, 2006). Tsai | | y re
edge from external sources co-varied with organizational actors’ p OSition
S In

various networks. a Å 4
bility. More than mere channels th

Knowledge-creation capa |
knowledge “just fl ows” networks are sometimes also fabrics for the inn
I., 2001; Know, 2001; Inkpen and Tsang 2005: it

of knowledge (Cross et a
et al., 2020). For example, this capability of network,
t

and Osario, 2013; Faems
served in research-intensive industries where scientific and techno)
Ogj-

cal developments happen so quickly and breakthroughs are so pervasive g F
often so destructive for existing technologies and solutions that single iba
|-

zations rarely possess the requisite capacity to innovate on their own (Pow I

and Brantley, 1992; Huggins et al., 2012). In such cases, rather than the :

gle organization, the locus for creation of new knowledge and innovations 3
re

often networks that knit actors with various competencies and from varj
Ous

is ob

organizations.
Storing capability. Knowledge can be stored in networks, then accessed, and
an

used later (Olivera, 2000, Jasimuddin and Zhang, 2011). Powell et al. (1996)
provided an example of this in a study of interorganizational collaboratio

in biotechnology industry, concluding: “Sources of innovation do not wer
exclusively inside firms; instead, they are commonly found in the interstic
between firms, universities, research laboratories, suppliers, and aaah

Consequently, the degree to which firms learn about new opportunities is a
asap the extent of their participation in such activities” (Powell et al,
Transfer capability. Social networks are potential channels for transferrin

knowledge between actors and organizations. It has been assumed and Pi
that some social networks and some types of knowledge are especially effec-
tive vehicles for transferring and sharing of context-specific and complex
knowledge (Uzzi, 1996; Fritsch and Kauffeld-Monz, 2010). Social networks,
pe rs frequently interacting actors connected with strong ties, are bet-
age EF are knowledge (Hansen, 1999). Transfer of
særtrbie acit knowledge is often facilitated by direct and repeated

ween actors who trust each other (Axelsson and Johanson, 1992;

Von Hippel, 1994; Dima and Vasilache, 2015).


What We Do and Do Not Know 43

Two dimensions of social networks

A key concept in network analysis of knowledge transfers is social capital,
which is defined as the aggregate of resources that are embedded within,
available through, and derived from the networks of relationships possessed
by an individual or organization (Nahapiet and Ghoshal, 1998: 243). Thus,
social capital encompasses both the networks and the value of the knowledge,
which are created and/or transferred within them (Ganguly, 2019). The social
capital and the involved networks can be described and analyzed in terms of
the structural and the relational dimension. The central structural feature is
the focal actors’ position, or localization in a network. Focal actors position
determines connections to all other actors and parts of the whole network
(Burt, 1992). Cohesion is the central concept when featuring the relational
dimension. Cohesion refers to the degree of mutual interaction, socialization,
and closeness between two actors (Granovetter, 1992). In the remainder of
this section, I present frequently applied structural and relational theoretical
constructs in network studies, and then present an overview of main research
findings about the extent to which and how social network characteristics
affect knowledge transfer processes and outcomes.

Structural and relational constructs

The structural and relational constructs applied in network analysis are devel-
oped with reference to three network levels: the single node level, the dyadic

level, and the whole network level.
The node level. A node is a single point in a social network. A network con-

sists of a number of nodes that are connected by various numbers of links. A
node is an actor: It can be one or more individuals, a unit in an organization,
an organization, or a nation. A key variable in determining a nodes influ-
ence in a network is centrality, which refers to a nodes localization/position
in relation to the center of the network. Network constraint is another fre-
quently used variable to analyze single node actors position in networks.
A network can be closed and thus constrained, in the sense that all nodes
are strongly interconnected with each other (Burt, 1992). It is suggested that
a node’s embeddedness in closed networks provides social capital, but also
redundant knowledge and limited access to new ideas and knowledge. How-
ever, a node's influence in a network does not depend solely on its central
location; it can also depend on whether the actor/node plays the role of a con-
necting point between two or more separated networks. Sociologist Ronald


Knowledge Transfer

y of structural holes within or bet
rtance of connecting points, 4 Ween

8. Å gt
parts of a network or two å Uc.

+h direct links (ties). Actors that Operate
ridge separate networks are supposed to be in da
w ideas and knowledge (Gargiulo and Bena.

Si

knowledge-gaining advantages of such a hy

‘zed as betweenness centrality (Freeman, > a
ha node lies on the path between two 0
rol the transfer of knowledge

by the

t More

he extent to whic

ks and can therefore cont

the networks. 4 network analysis refers to the social relation
dividuals. The key relational construct is fie Strengt)

hich depicts the degree of closeness between two actors (Granovette,
which dep Fa tie is indicated through the frequency, intensity, ang

‘on. The higher the tie strength, the higher the close.

ness felt between involved actors (Gillath et al., 2017). While Strong ties are
titte trust and the transfer of high fidelity and tacit know.

1973), weaker ties are supposed to lead to less constraint.
on actors and to benefit access to new ideas and knowledge (Hansen, 1999)
The whole network level. Researchers sometimes zoom in on the whole
network and on “the overall distribution of the presence and absence of
connections” (Carpenter et al., 2012: 1334) in such networks. A frequently
applied structural construct at this level is network density, which concepty-
alizes the frequency and the intensity of interactions among all nodes within
a network. It is defined as the ratio of all ties between nodes that are actually
present ina network—to the number of possible ties between the nodes. Thus,
density is a measure of the overall level of connectedness among members in
a network (Provan et al., 2007). Another construct applied to analyze whole
networks is centralization, which refers to the extent to which one or a few

nodes are considerably more connected than others.

ships between two in

duration of the interact

Network characteristics and knowledge transfer
outcomes

This section offers a brief overview of what we know from studies of the
extent to which social network characteristics influence knowledge transte!
processes and outcomes, The insights are presented with reference to studies
of three structural elements (characteristics of nodal position, ego network

pr


What We Do and Do Not Know 45

(that is, the local network of one single node), and the whole network) and
the main relational element, which is tie strength.

Effects of network node position

A substantial amount of research has been carried out to examine effects on
knowledge transfer processes and outcomes of a node centrality in a social
network, Studies at the intra-organizational level indicate that high network
centrality of an organizational unit is associated with increased access to new
knowledge and improved chances for transfer and adoption of knowledge
(Tsai and Ghoshal, 1998; Phelps et al., 2012; Ortiz et al., 2021). A founda-
tional work here is Tsai’s study (2001) of firms in three businesses. While
revealing a connection between units’ network centrality—and access to,
transfer and adoption of knowledge—Tsai also found that this connection
was moderated by the units’ absorptive capacity. Studies at the interorgani-
zational level have found associations between (focal) organizations’ network
position and knowledge transfer outcomes. The number of links (ties) to
prior knowledgeable adopters is associated with the focal organization's net-
work position (Still and Strang, 2009; Marchiori and Franco, 2020) and can
lead to variations in knowledge transfer success. However, research about
the effects of network position on knowledge transfer processes and out-
comes are ambiguous. Studies provide conflicting evidence (Phelps et al.,
2012: 1138) and the causal mechanisms used to explain the association are
mostly assumed (Reagans and McEvily, 2003).

Effects of ego networks
The concept of ego network refers to the “nearest, or local, network of

one single actor (node). Much research has been conducted to clarify how
and to what extent features of ego networks influence outcomes of knowl-
edge transfer processes. Despite these efforts, results are partly inconsistent.
The lines of inconsistency run between suggestions and findings about the
role of structural holes in ego networks, and the role of closed and tight
ego networks. Some researchers suggest that structural holes in ego net-
works is a main source for organizational innovations, in that it facilitates
access to and transfer of diverse new knowledge to the focal organization
(Burt, 1992; Hansen, 1999; Wu et al., 2020). However, other researchers have
suggested that organizational innovations are contingent upon network clo-
sure. Closed networks have characteristic features of many and direct links
between members, which facilitate the sudden diffusion of thick, tacit, and
high-fidelity knowledge (Ahuja, 2000; Maleszka, 2019). Phelps et al. (2012)
summed up the inconsistency of these suggestions as follows: “Structural

eee


edge Transfer

AG AtTransiation Theory of Knowl

ely related, implying the inform

e are invers
at the expense of cooperative be

|
|
|

holes and network closur ae
ural holes must CO

benefits of struct |
of closure and vice versa” (Pp. 1145).

rer as

network
Effects of whole ansfer processes and outcomes can algg p
e

ledge tr
Network effects on ke | Whole network studies go beyond Stud

k leve
traced at the whole networ
‘es of single nodes and ego networks and try to catch the overall pattern å
l

links among all nodes in a bounded population (Kilduff and Brass, 2010)
ork can consist of three or more organizat
For example, a whole netw | ¢ UZations
where individuals and units are linked by many = (tm Or connections and
flows (Kilduff and Tsai, 2003; Provan et al., 2007). There are few Studies from
this overall network level in general, and even fewer that especially study the
-afluence of whole networks on knowledge transfers. Despite the small num.
ber of studies, it is widely suggested that network density—that is, the actual
type and degree of connectedness among actors—has an influence on know].
edge transfer processes and on the rate of adoption of innovations within
whole networks (Cowan and Jonard, 2004; Provan et al., 2007; Bodin and
Crona, 2009). Å foundational work here is J. Singh's study (2005) of diffusion
of innovations within a sample of regional interorganizational U.S. networks,
Using data of patent citation as dependent variable, he initially found that
intra-organizational diffusion was stronger than interorganizational diffy-
sion of innovations. However, the interpersonal whole network that con-
nected various organizations was important in determining the observed
pattern of knowledge diffusion. The existence of links among members were
associated with increased knowledge flows. Link lengths were especially
important: While multiple and direct (short) links were associated with inno-
vation diffusion, few and indirect (long) links were associated with opposite

effect.

Social relational network element: Effects of tie strength

One of the most researched subjects in network analysis is the effects of
social tie strength. It refers to the frequency, duration, and affective attach-
ment of the relationship between network actors. However, results from these
research efforts are somewhat contradictory. On one hand, a lot of research
indicates that increasing tie strength increases the likelihood of enhancing
levels of trust (Putnam, 1993; Ring and Van de Ven, 1994) and thus enhancing
knowledge exchange between network members (Uzzi and Lancaster, 2005
Levin and Cross, 2004; Mishra and Mishra, 2013). Strong ties are associated
with improved conditions for knowledge creation (Tsai and Ghoshal, 1998)
and for the sudden and efficient transfer of tacit knowledge (Hansen, 1999;


What We Do and Do Not Know 47

Ganguly et al., 2019). On the other hand, several studies have indicated neg-
ative effects of strong ties on organizations” capacity to create and transfer
knowledge and innovations. Some researchers have found that strong ties
and high levels of trust are associated with reduced motivations to innovate
(Yli-Renko et al., 2001), Others have pointed to weak ties as being more effi-
cient than strong ones for spanning structural holes and gaining new ideas
and knowledge (Granovetter, 1973; Hansen, 1999). There are also research
that indicates few effects of strong versus weak ties to explain the pass-
ing of sensitive information across organizational borders (Stevenson and
Gilly, 1991). Thus, Centola (2018) took a different stand, arguing that the
spread of ideas, knowledge, and behaviors is no longer dependent upon either
strong or weak ties due to the emergence of the web society and internet,

which has established highly effective digital transfer channels beyond social
relationships.

Distance

A large body of literature concentrates on how a certain aspect of the relation-
ships between source and recipient units—the distance—affects knowledge
transfers. Much of this research has centered on illuminating three aspects of
distance: geographical (proximity), cultural, and institutional distance. These
are conceived of as three distinct research traditions.

Geographical distance and knowledge transfer

Proximity in knowledge transfer studies refers to the spatial distance between
source and recipient units. There is a lot of uncertainty about the effects of
physical distance on knowledge transfer processes and outcomes. Much of
this uncertainty stems from problems with isolating effects of geographical
distance from effects of cultural distance. It is hard to account for cultural
and contextual differences, which often co-varies with physical distance. The
methodological challenges and the meager supply of evidence have stimu-
lated the emergence of two contrastive views about geography and knowledge
transfer: the pro-proximity view and the “death of distance’ view.
Pro-proximity. The main pro-proximity argument is that knowledge flows
faster and is more effectively shared among co-located actors and organiza-
tions than among geographically dispersed ones, These arguments are often
backed by empirical observations and theories about patterns of innovations.
A defining feature of innovations is geographical concentration, which


48 —A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

r at certain places where people and
deas and knowledge are exchanged due

bout the importance of geographica|
ons have been emphasized both

tion theory. An early contriby-

means that they are likely to occu
resources are co-located, and where I

to geographical proximity. Arguments abou
closeness between actors (0 propel innoval!

in early and in later contributions to innova “any
who observed that having innovators

ion from Schumpeter (1934); |
makt and therefore easily shared ideas and

who were geographically co-located |
knowledge was an important condition that could lead to bundles of inter-

connected innovations concentrated in space and time An example is the
Great Britain during the early nine-

development of the steam locomotive in €
r innovation almost simultaneously

teenth century (Torre, 2008). This majo
ations (such as steel retails that

led to series of technical complementary innov |
could carry heavy locomotives) due to rapid knowledge sharing among geo-

graphically concentrated actors, such as engineers, businesspeople, retailers,

and politicians. | |
Early insights about the importance of geographic proximity between
'nnovators are continued as antecedents of later observations and theories of

business clusters. This concept, introduced by Michael Porter (1990), refers
to a geographic concentration of interconnected organizations and actors—
such as producers, suppliers, researchers, and other relevant institutions in a
particular area. There is a lot of evidence for the success of clusters to promote

innovations by gathering various resources within a limited geographical area

(Cooke, 2001; Massey and Wield, 2003). Most evaluations emphasize that the
main driving force behind high innovation rates in clusters is the speed and

quality of the knowledge exchange, which take takes place through networks
formed by co-located actors and institutions (Edquist, 1997; Langen, 2002;
Owen-Smith and Powell, 2004; Claver-Cortés et al., 2017). These insights
have laid the groundwork for innovation policies and strategies at the inter-

national level, such as the OECD's innovation policy initiatives (Lundvall
and Borrås, 2005), as well as at the national level (Kuhlmann, 2001) and the

regional level (Cooke et al., 1997; Tödtling and Trippl, 2005). The popular-
ity of “clustering” comes to expression in a worldwide diffusion of this idea,
leading to various versions and conceptualizations, such as innovation poles
(Taddeo et al., 2017), technological districts (Rosiello et al., 2015), techno-
logical parks (Claver-Cortés et al., 2017), science parks (Massey and Wield,
2003), industrial parks (Sosnovskikh, 2017), and technopoles (Castells 2014).

Death of distance. The agglomeration-inspired innovation theorists’ main
argument about the need for geographic proximity in order to speed up inno-
vations has, since the mid-1990s, been challenged by researchers who ques-
tion the basic premise in this argument, which is that geographic closeness Is


What We Do and Do Not Know 49

decisive for effective knowledge exchange between potential innovators. The
most succinct phrasing of those thoughts, coined by Cairncross and Cairn-
cross (1997), is “the death of distance,’ suggesting that new developments
of digital communication technologies and new travel habits have meant

that geographical distance may no longer be a limiting factor for people and
organizations ability to exchange knowledge.

Although geographical distance still counts as a transfer barrier, it obvi-
ously means less than it did only two or three decades ago. Research indicates
that the new communication technology has dramatically increased long-
distance contacts and knowledge sharing across organizational borders and
also across clusters (Breschi and Malerba, 2001; Pinch et al., 2003). Even
more interesting is the changing content of long-distance communication.
It is increasingly possible to communicate hard facts as well as “thick” and
tacit knowledge, and even emotions—a phenomenon that Bunnell and Coe,
(2001) characterize as “the de-territorialisation of closeness.” Modern com-
munication technology has the potential to unify the traditional strong
connection between place and presence. Actors can now be present and par-
ticipate in work processes at several places simultaneously without being
co-located (Urry, 2004). Thus, communication technology has made it pos-
sible to untie the connection between place and time (Hernes, 2014). It is
possible to exchange knowledge and co-work from different places in real
time. This is well known, for example, from co-operation within epistemic
communities, which are networks of individuals who almost entirely com-
municate by modern communication technology and, in principle, from
locations all over the world (Hakanson, 2005).

In sum, we are left with two highly contrastive approaches to the ques-
tion of what geographical distance means for knowledge transfer and sharing.
One approach stresses that geographical closeness is the key to knowledge
exchange and innovations, while the other proclaims that geography no
longer matters for human communication. The pragmatic interpretation is
that physical distance still does matter, but far less than it did before the
communication revolution. However, it is hard to find evidenced insights
about where, when, how, and to what extent physical distance influences
upon knowledge transfer processes and outcomes. Undoubtedly, it reflects

the methodological challenges of isolating and measuring the pure effects
of geographic proximity. However, there are some studies that manage to
document such effects and, albeit modestly, support the suggestion that phys-
ical distance does influence knowledge transfer (Arundel and Geuna, 2001;
Torre, 2008; Ensign et al., 2014; Vlajcic et al., 2019; Bignami et al., 2020).
It has been argued that the inherent knowledge transfer models underlying


tion Theory of Knowledge T'a nsfer

50 ATransla
ance of physical distance—indirect trang an
y

echnology, and direct transfer thre
s—are two means suited for transfer of differen, ve
communication technology is appropriate fo, al

fed knowledge; tacit and noncodified knowledo.
ce travels and are therefore more Be ig

face-to-face interaction

of knowledge. Whereas

distance transfer of codi

-distan
h more vulnerable for long | ette.
vade exchanged in direct physical meetings (Lundvall 1988; Gertler 2003;

Ambos and Ambos 2009). However, this argument is challenged by vid
ars who have observed a line of development where modern communicatio,

technology is increasingly suited to help overcome the effects of Beography
and to be present from various places and distances. Thus, such technolo.

gies are increasingly used to produce and exchange noncodified and tact

knowledge (Amin and Cohendet 2004; Hsu et al., 2007).

In addition to geography, the effects of distance on knowledge transfer across
organizational borders have also been studied in terms of cultural distance
The concept of culture refers to the common values, beliefs, assumptions, and
customs of a group of people (Schein, 1990; Hofstede, 2001). Culture shapes
the ways in which individuals within the group interpret and understand
reality, and consequently, shapes their actions. Thus, culture influences upon

the interpretation of, and receptivity toward, messages and knowledge com-
ing from other cultures. Cultural distance, in terms of how different/similar

source and recipient cultures are, is conceived of as an important variable
to understand processes and outcomes of knowledge transfers (McDermott
and Odell, 2001; Carrillo et al., 2009; Srivastava et al., 2020; Fu et al,
2022). Increased cultural distance between source and recipient is believed to
increase the potential of distortions of messages and problems of knowledge
transfers (De Long and Fahey 2000; Boh et al., 2013; Shenkar et al., 2020).
Knowledge transfer research has mainly been concerned with theorizing
and studying the effects of the national cultures in which source and recip-
ient units are embedded. Two seminal papers, both published in 1988, laid
important foundations for the stream of literature that focuses upon know!
edge transfer across national cultures (Kedia and Bhagat, 1988; Kogut and
Singh, 1988). Kedia and Bhagat (1988) and Westney (1987) were among
the first to conceptualize and enhance the role of national cultures, and
especially, to theorize conditions under which cultures facilitate or hamp¢t
cross-national knowledge exchange. Kedia and Bhagat’s point of departure I


What We Do and Do Not Know 51

the notion that cultures co-varies more or less systematically with nations
and that borders between nations represent potential barriers to knowl-
edge transfers, They proposed that the effectiveness of knowledge transfers
decrease with increased national cultural differences between source and
recipient. They also argued that transfer between two nations will be most
culturally affected when one of them is an advanced industrialized nation
and the other is a developing country. Kedia and Bhagat focus especially on
the transfer of technology and argued that the effectiveness of such trans-
fer across national cultures varies with characteristics of the technology:
whether it is product-embodied (that is, the transfer of physical products,
like advanced computer components), process-embodied (for example, the
transfer of patent rights of a scientific process and engineering details about
how to operate the technology), or person-embodied (experience-based
knowledge shared among source practitioners about appropriate ways to use
the technology). Central to their theory is the proposition that transferring
personal- and process-embodied knowledge of technologies is more difficult
than transferring product-embodied knowledge across units located in dif-
ferent nations, because cultural differences between nations play greater roles
in such transfers.

Kogut and Singh (1988) studied the influence of national cultures on for-
eign organizations entry modes to investments in the United States. The two
main analyzed types of entry modes are acquisition (the purchase of sufficient
stock in an existing company to gain control) and joint venture (a cooper-
ative enterprise by two or more organizations in a common and separate
organization, which otherwise retain their separate identities). Acquisition
is the most complicated and risky mode and can involve the integration of
existing foreign management and the alignment of structures, routines, and
practices across national and organizational borders. Thus, successful acqui-
sitions may require the foreign investing organization to obtain thorough
knowledge about the organization that is a candidate to be acquired (Meschi
and Métais, 2015). Joint ventures are less complicated, partly because they do
not presuppose integration with a foreign organization, and because respon-
sibility can be assigned to local partners. Kogut and Singh (1988) argued that
cultural differences between foreign investing organizations home coun-
try and the United States (where the investments take place) influence the
managers’ perceptions of the revenues, costs, and degree of uncertainty of

alternative entry modes. Thus, Kogut and Singhs article has an underlying
notion of national cultures as potential barriers to knowledge transfers. They

suggest that the greater the distance in national culture between the investing
organizations’ home country and the country where the planned investment

” lk ee ee =="


the more difficult it will be for the investing Organi,
Atig

knowledge about å foreign investment projec
mbedded in. Therefore, they also Suggest å
| | izati a

n to
the

will take place,

obtain and interpret
nd culture it is €

(1988) and Kogut and Sing
ationalize and study

and mapped national c
(1) weak versus strong uncer

I cultural variations. Hofstede conceptya;
ultures according to a four-dimensional fram ie
tainty avoidance, (2) individualism ve ok
I versus large power distance (that is, the extent " col
| actors in a nation accept or reject an unequal distin
of power as a “normal state”): and (4) masculinity versus feminin Ution
lyzing data from 128 foreign entries into the United States, Kogut a _
found clear variations in preferred entry modes between investing nr

å

vations from different nations. Data support their hypothesis that incre
cultural distance between the countries of the investing organization en
the

country of entry (in this case, the United States), leads to increased pr

sity to avoid acquisition and choice of joint venture as entry mode: es

the contrary, decreased national cultural distance increases the prop , ON
ensity

for choice of acquisition. |
Criticism has been raised towards cultural distance research. Som |
+ SOME crit. |

ics argue that the concept of national culture lacks construct clarity (T
and Verbeke, 2010; Shenkar et al., 2020), while others have revealed fl År,
the way the concept has been used in empirical knowledge transfer sa
(Shenkar, 2001; Selmer et al., 2007). In addition, there are studies Pee
only a modest effect (Beugelsdijk et al., 2018), or almost no effect (M a
et al., 2018), of national cultural distance on processes of knowledge ete
t

across organizational and national borders.

the less powerfu

Institutional distance and knowledge transfer

In a widely cited work, Tatiana Kostova (1999) challenged the fruitfulness of
the concept of cultural distance to indicate nation-level barriers to knowled ;
transfer. Instead, she proposed a reconceptualization of cultural distance å
øp a the institutional distance between source and recipients’ home coun-
rec ; developed the construct of country institutional profile (CIP) to

pture key elements of the national environment that influence knowledge

transfer
processes. To operationalize the institutional distance construct,


What We Do and Do Not Know 53

Kostova leaned on Scotts "three pillars” of institutions; that is, the regulative,
cognitive, and normative pillars (Scott, 1995), The regulative dimension
refers to existing laws and formal rules and regulations within a country
(Dikova and Van Witteloostuijn, 2007). Kostova argued that the probability
of implementing a practice that has been transferred across national borders
depends greatly on the extent to which it fits in with the recipient country’s
laws and formal rules. For example, it has been observed that national regu-
lations influence investing organizations’ choice of entry modes (Chao and
Kumar 2010). The cognitive dimension refers to notions and beliefs that are
widely shared by people in a specific country, The more the cognitive pillars of
source and recipients home countries differ, the more challenging it becomes
for recipient actors to recognize, interpret, understand, and assess the trans-
ferred practice (Khalil and Marouf, 2017). The normative component refers
to the dominant values and norms in the population in a given country. The
more that norm and value systems differ between the source and recipients’
home countries, the more challenging are the processes of implementing a
transferred practice. Kostova's concept of institutional distance is multidi-
mensional and complex. It includes three dimensions of institutional theory:
economic institutionalism, organizational institutionalism, and comparative
institutionalism.

In sum, Kostova argued that institutional distance—that is, the difference
between the country institutional profiles of the source and recipient's home
countries—is a barrier that accounts for a lot of variations, including vari-
ations in knowledge transfers of practices across national borders. Among
studies of transfer of practices across national borders that explicitly apply
the institutional distance construct are Kostova, 1999; Jensen and Szulanski,
2004; Ho et al., 2018. The institutional distance—construct has generated a
strand of literature (e.g Delios and Beamish, 1999; Kostova and Roth, 2002;
Xu and Shenkar, 2002; Malik, 2013; Beugelsdijk et al., 2017; Fortwengel,
2017; Aguilera and Grögaard, 2019; Jackson and Deeg, 2019; Kostova et.
al., 2020). Overall, many of these studies have found that increasing insti-
tutional distance at the country level is associated with increased chances for
negative organizational performance. Institutional distance is also associated
with effects on survival rates. For example, increasing institutional distance is
especially associated with decreasing chances for survival of foreign market
entries (Kostova et al., 2020). However, there are certain unresolved theoret-
ical and methodological challenges with the institutional distance construct.
Its multidimensional and very inclusive character may create a sense of a
“catch-all” concept that is more or less a substitute for the concept of coun-
try (Kostova et al., 2020). While it is a multidimensional concept, researchers


4 unidimensional construct, Ihus, operatic
varies substantially, which makes it 4... ln

(Hutzscenreuter et al., 2016).

concentrated on features of the kno

of research has vi
A seventh stream in knowledge transfer Processes a Cpe |

riations nd
itself as antecedents of va pe TE out. |
comes. The key variable is kn owledge ambiguity, which is the degree t Which |

ferred is clear and the invo|
knowledge to be trans | volved
the content of the ål fully understand how it works in Other

| | rganizat
in the adopting org be used in practice (Hedlund and Zander

nizations and how it can - al
concept of 90
Crossan and Inkpen, 1995; Foos et al., 2006). Ihe pt of causa] ambigiy

which is attributed to Lippman and Rummelt ( 1982), refers more speci fel |
to instances with irreducible uncertainty about which factors have omme: |
observed superior (or inferior) results. Thus, within this stream of research

knowledge ambiguity is conceptualized as a main barrier for Organization.
that aim to imitate other organizations (Reed and DeFillippi 1990; Simonin

1999). OG
Much ofthe research on knowledge ambiguity has centered on the dichoto.

mous concepts of tacit and explicit knowledge. Tacit is noncodified know.
edge and is therefore hard to transfer and acquire, while explicit Knowledge
is codified and easier to transfer. A defining characteristic of tacit Knowledge
is that it cannot be adequately articulated by verbal means. The coining of —
the concepts of tacit and explicit knowledge is credited to Michael Polanyi-
first mentioned in his 1958 book Personal Knowledge and elaborated in later

works (1962; 1967). An important forerunner for these concepts was out.

lined in a paper by Gilbert Ryle (1945), who distinguished between two
types of knowing: to “know that,’ which is the intellectual knowledge of

propositions, and “know how, which is detailed and often tacit knowl.
edge about how to carry out certain tasks. While explicit knowledge often
stems from logical deductions and the formulation of propositions, tacit
knowledge is generated through actors’ daily experience and their involve-
ment in practical problem-solving activities (Polanyi, 1967; Lam, 2000),
and by observations and imitations of others (Kikoski and Kikoski, 2004).
Therefore, tacit knowledge is, by definition, localized knowledge because
it emerges and is applied within a specific context (Nonaka and Takeuchi,
1995; Brown and Duguid, 1991; Muniz et al., 2022). Tacit knowledge can be
embedded in specific organizational units (Nelson and Winter, 1982), or in

ACtorg |
Orga.

)

9 PN NE OE TED DES ee ee NA ee: eee


What We Do and Do Not Know 55

networks, and/or be embodied as personalized knowledge in certain actors
(Wah, 1999).

A frequently expressed notion within this stream of literature is that tacit
knowledge is often of higher value than explicit knowledge. While explicit
knowledge, stored and expressed in manuals, for example, can offer step-by-
step guidelines for how to implement new technology and/or how to plan and
orchestrate the accomplishments of various organizational tasks, tacit knowl-
edge is often decisive for whether or not the new technology and the explicitly
designed routines and procedures will work in practice (Wagner and Stern-
berg, 1987). Another argument for the higher value of tacit knowledge refers
to competitive advantage. While explicit knowledge is relatively easy to share,
tacit knowledge is harder to acquire, and is therefore (sometimes) the secret
to a successful practice, which protects competitive advantage (Berman et al.,
2002). A third and common argument appreciating tacit knowledge is that
such knowledge developed and used by organizational members to solve spe-
cific problems is often the antecedent of new knowledge and innovations in
organizations (Leonard and Sensiper, 1998; Seidler-de-Alwis and Hartmann,

2008).

Knowledge transferability

There is a strong and unifying notion within this stream of research that tacit
knowledge is harder to transfer and acquire than explicit knowledge. ‘This

notion is premised on three main arguments.
First, there is the challenge of codifying, which is transforming tacit knowl-

edge into explicit knowledge, and avoiding the loss of crucial elements of

the knowledge base during such translations (Teece, 1977; 1981). The lim-
iting factor is language and grammar. The domain of words often lacks the

richness and precision necessary to explicate the tacit elements of knowl-
edge. The literature offers ambiguous answers to the question of whether
tacit knowledge is codifiable or not. Some scholars are skeptical and have
argued that attempts to explicate the tacit dimension can lead to unsatisty-
ing reductionism, leaving out the essentials (Alavi and Leidner, 2001; Okafor
and Osuagwu, 2006; Yugin et al., 2011; Hanafizadeh and Ghamkhari, 2019).
Even more skeptical was the philosopher Bernard Williams, who claimed,

“reflection can destroy knowledge” (Williams 1985: 148). Others are more
optimistic. For example, one of the four modes of Nonaka and Takeuchis

(1995) model of “knowledge conversation” is “externalization.” This mode
encompasses various means to make tacit knowledge communicable while


e tacit knowledge in the explicit version a8 Do
‘ | 8 '

how to explicate tacit knowledge have been diseusgert
SSed :

In

Novak and Gowin, 1984; Wilson, 2091. Mi
i, 2019). Iiton,

ærme a dds to competitiv
| O CO eness,
as far as it adds p ; Can be of hig

ce it is difficult to transfer and difficult for cg

ic significance sin tires
strategic significa Barney, 19 91; Zander and Kogut, 1995 , Pet}.

tors to reveal and acquire nek Lado
zhang 1998; Borges et al., 2019). However, organizations, such ag lin,

tional corporations, will often also have a strategic interest in explicating ins

knowledge that has been developed in certain units within the Organization
and then scale it up and diffuse it to other units within the organization, 4

order to effectively exploit the gained knowledge to strengthen the compet.
itive advantage towards other organizations (Tsai, 2001). This is referreg to
as “the leveraging dilemma” (Coff et al., 2006), which rap that explicat.
ing and up-scaling od tacit knowledge within an organization May reveal the
tacit knowledge—the "secrets”—for external competitors, which would make
it more imitable (Rivkin, 2001). In such cases, the advantage of the formerly
tacit knowledge may decrease and even be lost. As Coff et al. (2006) argued,
there are no simple solutions to this dilemma.

Third, on average, transferring and acquiring tacit knowledge usually takes
more efforts and resources and is therefore far more costly than trans.
ferring explicit knowledge. To reveal and acquire ambiguous Knowledge
often presupposes the gradual buildup of trust and of shared understanding
across organizations (Szulanski et al., 2004), and it often requires endur.
ing close—even face-to-face—interactions (Halldin-Herrgard, 2000; Becerra
et al., 2008). Therefore, as far as knowledge-searching organizations consider
search costs, they may decide to quit or limit efforts to acquire the tacit secrets

behind other organizations’ successful practices.

organizations i
tage. Tacit knowledge;

å nn pe pan stat 7 ws

ee Få Si DE Hr sk 3

Evidence or not? |

The ways certain knowledge properties (such as the degree of ambigu-
ity/clarity) influence the possibility of transferring the knowledge 1s å —
fairly well-researched theme. However, as Hedlund and Zander (1993) and |
Simonin (1999) observed in the 1990s, and which remains the case today |
relatively few empirical studies have linked knowledge properties toitstrans
fer across organizational borders. Findings from these studies are somewhat

-


What We Do and Do Not Know 57

mixed in relation to prevailing theories and suggestions. Some examples are

Zander and Kogut (1995) studied the internal transfer and external com-
petitors imitation of 44 major Swedish innovations taking place after 1960,
all of which had achieved a major share of world markets. The authors
hypothesized that the more codified and therefore more easily communicated
and understood the innovation, the shorter the times to internal transfer to
other organizational units, and also the time to external competitors’ imi-
tation. Their data supported the suggestion about the internal transfer: The
degree of codification had a significant impact on the speed of transfer of
the innovations to units within the corporations. Surprisingly, however, the
degree of codification did not determine rates of competitors’ imitation of
the innovations. To illustrate and gain a deeper understanding of what they
had observed at an aggregate level, the authors closely examined information
from three innovations. One of these was an example of a highly codified
innovation based on rather uncomplicated manufacturing processes. How-
ever, the codified character of this innovation’s knowledge base did not speed
up competitors’ imitation rates. Competitors’ nonadoption of internally cod-
ified knowledge sometimes reflects the source organizations capacity to
maintain secrecy towards external competitors (Ahmad et al., 2014). The two
other examined innovations were both based on complicated and noncodi-
fied knowledge. However, the tacit nature of this knowledge did not prevent
these innovations from being rapidly imitated by competitors. Zander and
Kogut suggested an explanation of these surprising findings by introducing
the concept of “common knowledge”: “Imitation may be possible even if the
innovator’s manufacturing knowledge remains proprietary. The importance
of manufacturing varies by innovations. In some industries, the key capabil-
ity is knowledge of the customers’ needs; knowledge of how to manufacture
may be ‘common’ among competitors” (Zander and Kogut, 1995: 80).

Based on data from 147 large and medium-sized U.S. organizations,
Simonin (1999) studied the simultaneous effects of knowledge ambiguity and
its antecedents on technological knowledge transfer. Contrary to Zander and
Kogut (1995), he found that increased degrees of knowledge ambiguity led
to increased problems for imitating organizations. Simonin also found that
tacitness was the most typical antecedent of knowledge ambiguity. Dhanaraj
et al. (2004) studied transfers of tacit and explicit knowledge between 140
international joint ventures (IJVs) and their foreign parent organizations.
They found that strong relational embeddedness between parents and their
appurtenant IJVs facilitated transfer of tacit knowledge, while it did not
affect the transfer of explicit knowledge. They also hypothesized that transfer


58 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

of tacit and of explicit knowledge from their foreign parents would have
a positive impact on the IVCs’ performance. Surprisingly, while data Å

ported the suggested positive effect of explicit knowledge on performan ce
the expected corresponding positive effect of tacit knowledge transfer on the

joint ventures’ performance was not found.

State of the art and the road ahead

Together, the seven reviewed research fields, with their relatively distinct by.
ies of literature, cover the main approaches in knowledge transfer research
over the last four decades. This research has brought forward new theories
and concepts, as well empirical-based insights, which have improved oy;
understanding of how and why knowledge transfers across organizationa|
units vary in processes and outcomes. In this section, I first distill and com.
pare the contributions from the reviewed research fields and then introduce

how the translation theory outlined over the subsequent chapters relates to

insights from these fields.

State of the art

Table 2.1 contains a brief summary and comparison of the seven reviewed
research fields—and related four characteristics. The first is the unifying
theoretical assumptions that underlie each field. The second is the central
independent variable. Each of the seven research fields concentrate on one
or a few key variables that are supposed to be the main explanatory fac-
tors to variations in knowledge transfer processes and outcomes. The third
characteristic highlights some of the most consistent findings from empirical
research, and the fourth highlights the mixed findings and critique that have
been raised against research from the various fields.

All seven of these theories are constructed around an image of a main
barrier that may either prevent, distort, and decelerate knowledge flows,
or enable and propel them. In six of the seven research fields—the design
of formal organizational structure, the absorptive capacity, features of the
social network, and three versions of distance between source and recipient
(geographical, cultural, and/or institutional)—the barriers are conceptual-
ized as organizational properties. In the seventh knowledge research field,
big, beer et eae ER va vidd

a property of the transferred knowledge. The

0

panuiuo)

"(SS3Up3)23UUOD

"(Spu3 [PIDJIUIUIOD
10] 11 J10Jdx> pue 41 je[prunsse

*UONPUIIOJUI [EUIIJX3 “MoU yoyo
pure Ayisusp YISuanns an Uuon Oanes 9} 9ZTUODII 03 UOT (‘ainjonys SUneN[pPEJ/JULLIEQ
-IsOd YIOMJOU SIOJDE ‘ST JEU) -eZ1UeS1O Ue JO ÅNJIGe SU} ‘ST [221019 pure 2]UOZIIOH) “31Ny UJIM 3JQELIBA JUIP
"30UBISIP TeDTYdeis035y + YIOMIJOU [EIDOS du] JO S3INJEI jeu) ‘Ajyiedes >and1osqv -9N.1s UONPZIUPJIO [PUIIO -usdaput pe1U3”)
"suOnPZIUPHIO
"S35$3501d 'S3S53J01d JJJSUEI) SSQJJP S3S$390Id I9JSUTI)
JJSUP.I) 38p3J[MOUY UI 38p3[MOUY Ul SUONELILA 38p>[MOUY UI SUOHELIPA JO
SUOHELIPA JO 3DINOS 3U] IG JO} 3AISIJAP 3Q UBJ—UIIY) 'S3S$3590Id JJSUEI I8P3[MOUY IDINOS 3Y] 3Q 340J313Y] UD
pue jaye ued (sjenpIATpul urgjim UONISOd SsIOJDE 3U) Ul SUOTLIILA 1OJ JAISIDIP 3G pure SJaJSURI) J8pP3[MOUY
pur) suoneZIUP910 U33M]3Q pue—suoneziuesio UIIMJIQ ued Åjrdeded aaANdiosge jO duruajap saWnN>UIOS pure [PU uondunsse
32UPISIP [PJIYder303r) pue uryjim SYIOMJOU [LINO [249] SUONPZIUPSIO JUIIdIDIY -UPYD UD 3INJDNS jeULIOJ [22031034] SULASIUL
SJJJSUEI)
JJJSULI) I8p>[MOUY SJJJSUEI] J8p>[MOUYY SJJJSULI) JS8p>[MOUY 35p>[MOUY pure 3INJDNIJS
pure aoure}jsIp [EJIryde13097) pure syJOMjau [ENOS put (DY) Ayioedes aandiosqy

—

—

UONPZIULJIO [PLUILIO.J

SP]el} YDJEISJJ JIJSULII 38 P3|MOUY PIMSIAdJ UdAS :ÅJEWILUNS TZ GEL


"SUONPAOUUI JO 30UIS13UID
3Y) JO} SJJUPLYD paseaidut
pure asueypxa a8paymouy

PeseaIOUl YIM payeposse SI
'SI3JSNPD SSJUISNQ JO SPUIY
SNOLIPA Ul JerIdAq SI se
*SS3UISOP [PIJIYde1803r)

'38p3[MOUY

HP), PUL X3jduro> Ye) JO
JIJSUEI] JO} SUOTIPUOD ay} 13)
-J9q 34Y] 'san [eID0s 3unsey pur
Dap Åurur YIM P3>aUUOd
312 SIOJDE JY} 310UI SUT, “¢
'I8p3JMOUy Mou Sutures pur
SUNJ3JIP JO s2dULYD paseaIout
SARY SYIOMJSU UIIMJIG SIJOY
[einjoniys ueds yey] s10}De
YIOMION 7 “suOTIeZIURSIO

sundope so1d nyssaoons jo
ISLQ ISP3[MOUY IU} 0} ssadoe
Pase312ur YILM pajenosse

ST UN PeUONPZIUPJIO UR JO
Åpenuao 410M)>U USIH I

'92URUIIOJIId

[EUONLZIURSIO J[PI3AO pue
quaurdopsap ASojouy Ie}
‘syuayed mou ‘s}jonpoid mau jo
UOTRIIUIS 3Y) SE YONs 'SJUIOD
-NO J3JSUL1) UIe}I99 pue DV
JO spPaa] Yöry UddMJ9q suone
-IDOSSE PUNO] savy SJIPNIS ”Z
‘aSpo]Mouy

MoU JO Uuonerojdx> pue uon
-dope Y3Jsue.n Jo saouery>
P>SB3JDU! YIIM PIJLIDOSSE

318 IV JO spar uår "I

"aye aytsoddo
34} JIM poyeiosse SI UONHENUID
-JapIP [21UOZIIOY “suLIeYs pue
JaJsueI] J8p>[MOUY posesi9ur
UJIM PIJLIDOSSE SI UONEIF
-9JUT [EJUOZLIOY PYM “F
‘SIoJsURT] 38p3[MOUY [P1UOZI
-10Y 10} saoueIpuTY [ENUI]Od
ore SJIUN poziuesio AyyeyuozI
-1OY UsaMJaq SIIPIOG *¢ “ayo
ajtsoddo ay} yjim payeIsosse
ST SULIDARIOI BULILYS pure 13]
-SUP.1] 38p3[MOUY FUISPIJJDUI
YIM payelosse SI FULI3ÅPJIP
PYM ”T 'SIIJSURLI] J8p>[MOUY
pzemuMmop pue premdn 10]
sodueIpury [ENU3JOd are
SINJINIYS [EULIOJ JO SIJÅR]
[821194 UIIM]3G SJap10g "I

SSUIPUY JUJSISUO”)

JIJSULI) aSpaymouy
pure 30ueysIp estydesZ0a5

SJJJSUEN 38p3[MOUY
PUP SYIOMJOU [EIDOG

SJIJSULI) 28p>[MOUY
put (HV) Aedes JAnNdIosqv

SJJJSUEI

35p3[MOUY pure 3INJJNIS
UONPZIUPSIO [LULIO.J

panunuo) TZ ajqer


"sarpn]s pPJLdurd
ul SJJGELILA ÅJOJPUPJÅX>
J3Y}O WOT] JJGELILA STU}

SULIOSI JO SasusTTeUD [LID
-ISOJOPOY}SUI 3Y] 0) anp
$3UI02JNO pur SJJJSUPLI]

35p3[MOUyY UO ÄjIUITXOJd JO
$)92J> 3U] Noe spnpuos
03 andy pp STI *T YDJEISII
pP31U3ILIO- 3JUPLISIP JO
yjeaP, sNsI3A YDJPISJI
p3ju3LIO-ÄJUITXOId

-01d uro] sgurpuy pue
SUONS388NSs U3IMJIAG SIND
-U3JSISUODUI 3JP 3413YJ "I

"1U3JSISUOJDUT

ore 98p3[MOUY Mou JO UOT]
-P}IO]dxo pure J3JSULI] 3U]

UO $J23J3> 113Y] pue—s10}9e
suruueds-3joy peInon.gs

U}IM (S3T] IoyeIM) SYIOMJIU
uddo d1OUI JO 3[01 3Y] sns

-J3A (S31 SUOIS) SYIOMJIU
pasop JO 3[01 ay] JO Sarpn]s
UIOIJ Sj[NSIaY *Z snonsiqure

318 SJUI0IJNO pure S3S53201d
JajsueI} 38p>[MOUY UO UON
-ISOd YJOMJJU SJOJPE JO SJRJD
JNOQe YDIPISJI UIOIJ SIJNSIY "I

‘pamoys pure PJUIUULX3

JOU *PaUINSSP UIJJO JIP s}Dayo
put OV uam)9q SJT [PSTLUI
pourre[D '£ JPNISUOD OV
ay) Jo uonezreUoneIIdo
pue suonezHen)daouod
U33M134 SYUIJ 3500 *Z
'J9N1]SUO0> [PUOISUIUITP

-IUN ® SB payead} Udo SI
YDIYM YIJDLILYD JEUOISUIUI
-IpH mur $J>n1)SUOd SUT, "I

:YDIRISII Dy JO pue JINISUOD

34) JO s}adse 3317) 0] anp SI
SIUI, “DV Aq pasned are saya
94} 19YJ3YM JE3PUN Udo SI
I Ov JO sao 9y} pauodar
JARY SJIPNIS ÅURUI STI AA,

‘JUD}SISUOIUI IIe IUIODJNO

pue SJoJSUPI) J8p3[MOUY UO
uonezRNU3J9P/UONPZHPLIUID
[euonezrues10 JO saa By}

JO SoIPNys uro sImsay 'Z
"1U3JSISUODUI 3IL SdUTODINO
pue SJIJSURI) J8p3[MOUY UO
UONLZITEULIOJ JO sao 3U]

JO SoIpNys WO’ synsay "I

anbyud/s3ur
PIG PEN


"UONS388nS sTy] PaJuaurn>op

JAPY sarPnIs yeduidurs may AJSursuidins
98p3jmouy (payrP0> pur 1IDrdxa3)
snonsiquie SSI] UTY] JIJSUE.N 0} Japrey
SI 35pa[MOUY JIDE] put snonsiqure
Jey] paysassns Åpapim st II y8noynry

San [NoYyIP Jajsuey ssp2;mouyx
SUISLSIDUI YM PIJLIDOSSE SI Uuonez
-TURSJO 321NOS & WO} paiiajsueI} 3q
0} 38P3[MOUY JO SSJUJDE) Furseauduy

Xm8rqure 38p3[mouy jo 33133

"S3SS3J01d 13Jsuen

38pa]MOUy UT SUONeLIEA JO 3>1NOS ou}
oq puke s.uanyut 0} Ajay] are aBpo
-[Mouy JO AMSiqure ut SuoneLIeA
'SNY[, "SI9p10Q JeuOTezIULBIO ssoIDe
ÅNpqes3jsuen sy I3uanpur [iM Jou
10 snonsiquue si yt 23Y)DYM ÅPenIdsa
‘ISp2|MOUY au JO sansddoud uTe}I9°)

SQNSUIJDLILY) sspsjmouyy

"sarpn]s JUDIDYIP
wiol ssurpuy 8urreduro> sanpmoyrp
O]UI spa3J pue—s]daya SuLInsesur JO
pue uonezieuoyeiodo jo surajqoid
0} Spea] SIU], “Sarpnys yeduidurs ur
J2N1]SUO> peUorsuaunprun e se pardde
Apuanbagy styr 95n1]suo> [EUOISUIUITP
“H[NUT 8 SI 32URISIP JEUONNINSUT SITY MA

'92URUIOJIad puonezueg10

JANEJSJU JO S39ULYD PaSLIJDUT YIM PIJL
“Posse SI PAA] ATJUNOD ay} JE 32UrTISTP
[EUONNIHSUT SUTSEIJDUT :>0URUIIOJIDd
[PUONPZIULJIO JO SJINSLIUI SNOLIBA

puke 32ueRISIP [eUONN sul U3IM]3q
SUON>3UUOd PUNOJ savy SJIPNIG

'Sajgoad peuonnnsur oyp>ds-A1nuno

"S9S$3901d 1aJsuen

38p3[mouy SUIPnpuI—s13p10q peuoneu
SsO1de SJSS3501d JO Åjare e ur suone
"HPA JO 9DINOS dU} 3q Uk (suonnjNnsur
SAHPUIOU pure 'dANIUJ0> ‘sane nal
sÅnuno» et JO samyeay pe>rdA) SU} SI
1241) sapyosd reuonnjnsur sarnuno»
UIIMJIQ S39U2J3JIP pur sone

"SJ3p10Q
[PUONPU S$S0JJP S3S$3001d 13JSUPI] 38p>
-[MOU JO S2UIODINO UO 3JULISTP 3INJJND
[2Uorjeu JO $J02JJ> Ma] PUno] sorpnys
JU3234 JUIOS 7 "SJIPNIS Jajsuey sspo
-[Mouy Ur par[dde usaq sey 1da2uo0>

34) SÅRM 374) Ul SME PUL (3INI [ND
[euoneu) ATE] JON.IYSUOD JO YOR] "I

"W3Y) UIIMJIQ
SJJJSULI] ISP>[MOUY JO SUIIJQOId pue
sagessau JO UONJIOJSIP 10] fenuajod
dU} sJSBJJJUT UONPZIUPJIO JUdIdPJL &
Jo uonezr[e20] dy} pue uoneziuer,10
924nOS & JO UONEZIEJ0] 3Y] UZaMJaq
S2UEISIP [EIN] [NI [eUOnNeU Jurseaaou]

311 [nd Jeuoneu 10/pue jeuonezmure810

"SIap10q
[PUONPZIUESIO SS0IDP S3SS3D01d Jajsuedy
35p3[MOUY UI SUOHELILA JO 321nos ay
oq puke 32udnpur 0) Åpy st (ajdoad jo
dno18 pauyap e dq pereys sanyea pue
SUIO SND ‘sfaljaq ‘sIOLARYaq ‘suTIOU UOT
7UI0d 34] “SI JEYI) aMyyNd suoyeu 10 /pue
3Jn [NI sjrun puoneziue$10 UIIMJIJ
Ayeprunssrp /Ayepruns JO 33199p ay,

anbyu>/sgurpug pox

ssurpuy JU9}sIsuo’)

Paye Suneyppey/Jurzreq
HIM 9[qeliea JUIP
-uadaput yequa’)

uonduansse

[22134034] 3ur4nun

>2ueysiq euonnnsup

>2UEISIG eINyND

a


What We Do and Do Not Know 63

barriers are conceptualized as variables, which means that certain scores
either hamper or facilitate knowledge transfer and sharing. For example,
various designs of formal structure that may decelerate or accelerate trans-
fer, high or low absorptive capacity, central or marginal position in social
networks, or high or low distance between source and recipient are all associ-
ated with either improved or exacerbated conditions for knowledge flows and
exchange.

These theories have made at least two major contributions to our under-
standing of knowledge transfer across organizational borders. First, during
the last three decades, knowledge transfer research has conceptualized the
phenomenon and developed a scientific language that makes it possible to
communicate much more precisely about knowledge transfer challenges than
before. Second, these theoretical constructs and the subsequent empirical
research have obviously contributed to our understanding of the puzzles
behind variations in knowledge transfer processes and outcomes. We now
know that knowledge transfers are influenced by formal organizational struc-
ture and that the organizational capacity to absorb and use knowledge is
very important and dependent on the ability to discover, acquire, assimi-
late, adjust, and then exploit the knowledge that has been gained. Further, we
know that the characteristics of social networks that connect organizations
and actors influence transfers, as do the physical, cultural, and institutional
distance between source and recipients. It is also evidenced that character-
istics of the transferred knowledge, whether ambiguous or not, influence
transfer processes and outcomes.

However, although empirical studies have documented associations
between the abovementioned variables and knowledge transfers, most of
these effects are modest. In addition, as indicated in this review, results
from empirical studies are often mixed, which shows that despite great
research efforts, many variations in knowledge transfers remain to be
explored and explained. The modest effects revealed in studies reflect,
among other things, a methodological bias in knowledge transfer research.
A large proportion of this literature, and especially the most influential
contributions, are quantitative studies of large samples. Correspondingly,
there are few qualitative works. One important implication of this is that
the processes that connect an independent variable and a registered eftect
in relation to various knowledge transfer outcomes are mostly assumed
and not examined and showed. Another implication stemming from the
methodological bias is that we lose sight of the actors—the people—who are
involved in knowledge transfers. This book is premised on the suggestion
that a path to improved understanding of variations in knowledge transfers

go Gp /--


| the invol om
do throughout knowledge transfer P

Beyond barrier approaches

wledge transfer outlined in this book drawn,
above. One is the conclusion that despite .
red by prevailing theories, many variations remain,
f this, a promising road ahead that goes b yo
hes is to zoom in more clearly and theorize os
volved actors in knowledge transfers. Almog 2

f the reviewed works from the seven research fields have been carried oy
O the roles of actors and processes in knowledge transfer,

without focusing on Gr | |
While most of the reviewed studies indirectly present an image of involved
of knowledge, a translation approach conceptyay.

| jers
actors as passive carrier
p ors who enact the knowledge, and thus influence

izes such actors as mediat | |
both knowledge transfer processes and outcomes. Actors involved in know.

edge transfers, whether source-based, recipient-based, or others (externa
consultants, clearinghouses, public authorities, etc.) must regularly face and

cope with “stickiness” (Von Hippel, 2004; Szulanski, 1996; Winkless, 2022),
Stickiness is a property of knowledge transfers and refers to all barriers and

challenges that mediators encounter when trying to transfer knowledge that
resides in a certain organizational unit to one or more other units. While

mediators’ knowledge transfer efforts often fail, they do also regularly man-
age to cope with stickiness and overcome barriers by processes of Knowledge
enactment, which can include downplaying and even removing some ele-

ments of source versions of knowledge, while amplifying others in order to
make knowledge fit into various recipient contexts. Therefore, zooming in on

the involved actors and tracing their modes of coping with stickiness is a key
to identifying and understanding the antecedents of variations in knowledge

transfer processes and outcomes,
Mediators struggles with stickiness in knowledge transfers unfold over

time as more or less connected and coordinated processes, such as those
for identifying, interpreting, and encoding knowledge about (desired) source
practices, and processes of decoding, implementing, and adapting transferred
knowledge in various recipient units, Thus, tracing and theorizing media-
tors roles as acts of translation presupposes a process approach to knowledge
transfers,

some insights fro |
of empirical research insp1

to be explained. In light 0
traditional barrier approac
the role of processes and in



3
antecedents of a Translation Theory

of Knowledge Transfer

introduction

This and the following chapters develop the theory of knowledge transfer as
translation. The translation theory draws on ideas and perspectives imported
from disciplines other than knowledge transfer studies. Therefore, the first
section of this chapter is devoted to questions about the development of new
theories of organization and management. What characterizes new theories
in our field, and how are they made? In particular, what are the challenges,
the pros, and the cons of attempts to make theories based on borrowings
from other disciplines? This discussion and its insights are related to the chal-
lenges of outlining a translation theory of knowledge transfer. The second
(and main) part of the chapter addresses the two antecedents of the the-
ory: translation studies, a school of thought that originated from linguistics
in the early 1970s; and the French/Scandinavian translation school in organt-
zation studies. Concepts, arguments, images, and models are borrowed from
these disciplines, thus providing important elements to the theory-building

process.

Sources to new theories of organizations

Theories of organizations can be indigenous, meaning that they have orig-
inated within the field of organizations and management research and are
explicitly associated with this field. According to Oswick et al. (2011),
the three most typical domestic organization theories are stakeholder the-

ory, contingency theory, and sensemaking theory. However, theories of

organizations—like the one developed here—can also be based on impor-
tations of ideas, images, and models from domains outside the organiza-

tion and management field. Many attempts to theorize about organizations
have been based on borrowed ideas from outside domains (Morgan, 1989;

A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer. Kjell Arne Røvik, Oxford University Press. © Kjell Arne Ravik (2023).
DOI: 10.1093/080/9780198832362.003.0003

a o-— =. pen PENE Penn p—
i: sp nr PE ae ent mer
Shake: ve ae See


nr

68 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

Chen et al. 2005; Cornelissen, 2003; Floyd, a — et al, 014
Oswick et al. (2011) studied which of por ; ( an about Organi.
vation and management (OMT) were base on orrowings of ideas ron
outside, and which were home-grown; that IS, generated directly from t

; hat 12 out of the 15 were mainly borrowing,

OMT field. They concluded that 14 |

especially from neighboring disciplines, such as sociology, psychology a
economics—but also from more distant domains, such as biology, mathemar
(2009) studied the structure of idea-impor

$

ics, and physics. Whetten et al. aren |
to organization theory. They distinguished between vertical borrowing
ts that were developed at either higher or lowe, le

(importing of concep | | |
els of analysis) and horizontal borrowings (importing of concepts used Å
mena in different contexts; that is, Outside th

e

understand and explain pheno
found that one of the most common Vertical

domain of organizations). They | |
borrows is attempts to theorize organizations based on ideas imported from
psychology and/or from sociology about individuals’ behavior, such ag when

identity is ascribed to and constructed as a feature of organizations ( Albert

and Whetten, 1985).
There is an expanding literature stream on variolls aspects of horizon.

tal idea-imports to theories of organization and management. Frequently

asked questions are (a) What drives scholars to import ideas from foreign
domains when developing theories of organizations‘ (b) What is the conten

of such borrowings? (c) How are metaphors used in organizational theory.
ing? (d) How can borrowings from outside be exploited to make high-quality

organizational theories?

Borrowings from outer domains

A main driving force behind idea-imports from external sources is the desire

to develop novel theories about organizations. Some idea-borrowings pro-

vide lenses that can lead to the identification and conceptualization of certain

aspects, connections, and patterns that have organizational relevance and
were previously not noticed or even known (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980; Inns,
2002; Cornelissen, 2005). The development of new theories is conceived of as
the preeminent scholarly effort, since a good theory “gives meaning to data,
defines phenomena, explains and interprets findings and fuels discoveries
(Colquitt and Zapata-Phelan, 2007: 1059). However, imported ideas may pri
marily confirm and strengthen what is already known about organizations,
According to Oswick et al. (2002), a borrowed idea (such as one in the form
of a metaphor) sometimes “functions as an aid to knowledge dissemination
rather than knowledge generation” (p. 298).


Antecedents of a Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 69

rhe content of imports

The content of the imports from outer domains to organization theory are

multifaceted. There are observations of importation of whole theories, includ-

ing both broad paradigmatic theories and propositional theories (Chen et al.,

2005; Whetten et al., 2009). Another important group of borrowings is

concepts, Which are most frequently imported to organization theory from

neighboring disciplines, such as sociology and psychology (Whetten et al.,
2009), but sometimes also from distant domains (Boxenbaum and Rouleau,
2011). However, most of the borrowed elements from outside to the field of
organization and management come in the form of metaphors and analogies
(Oswick et al., 2011). A metaphor is a figure of thinking, or speech, in which a
word or a phrase that belongs to, and literally gives meaning within a certain
context, is applied to describe objects, actions, relations, and logics in another
and foreign context. Metaphor use presupposes (at least) two contexts, where
elements from one context (words and phrases) serve as vehicles for men-
tal border-crossing and comparisons with other contexts (Richards, 1937).
This dynamic aspect (border-crossing) is a key feature of metaphors, and
clearly echoed in its etymology. The Latin word "metaphora” means carrying
over. To apply a metaphor means to make an implicit, hidden comparison
between two contexts that are unrelated, but share some common character-
istics. Thus, a metaphor differs from the rhetorical figure simile, which is a
description made explicit by the use of “as” or “like” to make a comparison
of two contexts (for example, “like a virgin’).

The other main type of imports to organization theory is analogies. The
definition of an analogy is close to that of a metaphor: a comparison between
one phenomenon (x) and another (y) typically in order to clarify, under-
stand, and explain the nature of and variation in y in light of characteristics
of x. However, there are some slight differences between metaphors and
analogies. Unlike metaphors, analogies are similes. A typical analogy con-
tains both a comparison (between x and y), and an explicit inference that
x is “like” or “as” y. Gentner (1982; 1983) highlighted another distinction,
pointing at the expressive and heuristic capacity of metaphors to evoke emo-
tions. This contrasts slightly with extended analogies, which are often used
for the solely rational purpose of analyzing and explaining variations in y
in light of x. Despite these nuances, much more connects metaphors and
analogies, The most conspicuous common link is the comparison and cross-
ing of borders between two or more domains—with the potential to explain
and gain new knowledge (Tsoukas, 1991; Fauconnier and Turner, 2002).
In practice, organization researchers treat metaphors and analogies rather

interchangeably (Ketokivi et al., 2017).


20 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

Metaphors as means in organizational theorizing,

Two approaches

1 *

| | | tes

| s to build theories vary considera
metaphors and analogies as mean bly the
are two main approac

hes to the question of how to use metapho,
analogies in theorizing

d the

The theory-confirming approach

Since the early 1980s there has been increasing academic interest in under.
standing how analogies and metaphors work in various human contexts
such as in understanding formal organizations (Morgan, 1980; Alvessgn
ans Spicer, 2011) and in “everyday life” (Lakoff and Johnson, 1989) The

increased interest in clarifying the role of metaphors can also be spawned
across a wide and diverse set of academic disciplines, including Cognitive Psy.

chology (Billow, 1977; Leishman, 1990), philosophy of science (Botha, 1986)
anthropology (Poole, 1986), medicine (Geest and Whyte, 1989), linguisticg
(Shanon, 1992), and teaching (Pickering and Attridge, 1990),

Through his seminal book Images of Organizations Gareth Morgan (1989)
was among the first to introduce and translate the early 1980$ regener.

ated interest in metaphors and analogies to organization theory. The many
scholarly contributions that followed Morgans book were characterized by

an underlying and unifying notion that the purpose and functioning of
imported metaphors to organization theory was to reveal similarities between
the source domain of the analogies/metaphors and the field of organization
to speed up learning and to extend and sharpen our images of organizations
(Koch and Deetz, 1981; Oswick et al., 2001; 2002; Inns, 2002). The inherent
logic of the similarity approach can be outlined as containing three phases.
The first is a search phase, in which the borrower looks for an appropri-
ate source domain; that is, an outside domain that may share some features
with the target organization and therefore be a candidate from which to
import analogies and metaphors. Next is the comparison phase. Here, a
source domain has been chosen. The borrower, acting in a more or less
“systematicity mood” (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980), now zooms in on certain
characteristics on the target; that is, the domain of organizations. Through

comparisons (cognitive processes of oscillations between source domain and


Antecedents of å Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 71

the field of organizations), hidden similarities are revealed and acknowl-
edged. Comparisons can lead to detection of partial resemblances and to
discovery of more modest aspects of sameness (Oswick et al., 2002), as well
as to the explication of deep structural likenesses between the foreign and
the domestic domains (Tsoukas, 1991; 1993). The third and final phase is
the exploitation phase. Now the metaphor has been established as another
organizational image that can be used for broadening and sharpening the
understanding of organizations.

This modest ambition of metaphor imports to organization theory—
to more clearly see what we already have seen—is a defining feature of
many contributions characterized by the similarity—or theory-confirming
approach. For example, Morgan (1980) argued that the purpose of his impor-
tation of eight metaphors is to make managers and students of organizations
more model-rich. Multi-metaphorical actors may have increased capacity to
“read” and understand different aspects of organizations, and may also pos-
sess an appurtenant broader specter of action alternatives—which increase
the possibilities for better fit between organizational problems and solu-
tions. The overall purpose of the theory-confirming approach is to compare
the domain of organizations with the domain from which the metaphor is
drawn—to look for and highlight eventually likenesses of certain properties.
According to Oswick et al. (2002), this approach is an act “of making the

familiar more familiar” (p. 295).

The theory-generating approach

Cognitive psychologists have criticized similarity theorists for not being
sufficiently concerned with the complex meaning-generating mechanisms
involved in metaphor-processing (Camac and Glucksberg, 1984; Fauconnier

and Turner, 1998). More specifically, organization researchers have criti-
cized similarity theorists for overlooking the fact that imported metaphors
and analogies may be the source of new insights and theories of organi-
zations (Cornelissen, 2005; Boxenbaum and Rouleau, 2011). A stream of
work within cognitive science has contributed to improved understand-
ing of the creative, heuristic potential of connecting different domains by
analogies and metaphors (Tourangeau and Sternberg, 1981; Murphy, 1996;
Stamenkovic et al., 2019). When the semantic structure and concepts of dif-
ferent domains are compared by an analogy and/or a metaphor, new insights
that were previously inconceivable can emerge. Cornelissen (2005) took these
arguments further in his domains-interaction model, in which he identified


23 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

zed the complex processes tha
er domain, and the possible developmen,

5. Cornelissens model contains the three

Port of a

of q New |

metaphor from an out
folie: am

theory of organization

phases. war
Development of 4 generic structure. In this initial stage, a com
encounters a metaphor and the relevan

(for example, a theorist)
to be seen as parallel are found, and

are identified. The structures | the cope ll
spondence between these structures is mapped. The generic structure % i
initial cognitive construct that provides the foundation for further denial |

ment of the metaphor that goes beyond mere mapping of similarities bety |
the source and the target domain. Cen

Development of blend. Blending is a concept for further juxtaposing ol
ments from the domains and elaboration of meaning, which is made pened |
within the framework of the generic structure. Throughout the blen ding Ile |
cess, elements from the two input spaces—the target and the external a |
domain—are composed and elaborated upon (Grady et al., 1999), en

Emergent meaning. In this final phase, new insights can emerge from the |
blend regarding the target domain and contribute to the shaping of å then ed
The blend contains new meaning that cannot be traced back either to the å

get or to the source domain. Cornelissen highlighted the difference betwee

approaches that conceive of metaphors as means to confirm existing or :

nization theories and approaches stressing metaphors theory-generatin
8

Prehende, ;

potential:

The basic mechanism involved in the production and comprehension of
metaphors is not the selection of pre-existing attributes of the conjoined terms
as the comparison model implies. It is, rather, the generation and creation D
new meaning beyond a previously existing similarity. Metaphor involves the
conjunction of whole semantic domains in which a correspondence between
terms or concepts is constructed, rather than deciphered, and the resulting image

and meaning is creative, with the features of importance being emergent.
(Cornelissen, 2005: 751)

Although the domain-interaction model offers some guidelines to increase
the probability of developing new theories of organizations, the creative
cognitive process involved when actors encounter metaphors is very diffi
cult to predict and control (Boxenbaum and Rouleau, 2011). It is evidenced
Knowledge that although metaphors stimulate cognitive creative processes,
a fascinating property of such processes is that their outcomes are almost
unpredictable,


Antecedents of å Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 73

Metaphors and theory quality beyond novelty

Much of the discussion about the role of imported analogies and metaphors
to organization theory has concentrated on their creative potential to gen-
erate a supply of new theories (Shapehard and Suddaby, 2017). This is
the heuristic aspect of an imported analogy or metaphor, which refers to
its potential to introduce new concepts and hypothesis that are appropri-
ated to—and conceived of—as promising within the field of organization
theory (Davis, 1971; Bacharach 1989). However, novelty is only one of
several features of a high-quality theory. Cornelissen and Durand (2014)
provided a typology of analogies and metaphors that researchers apply in
their efforts to develop theories of organizations. The first is heuristic anal-
ogy, as mentioned above, which is common and appropriate in the initial
phase of theory-building processes. The second is causal analogy. Here, the
assumption is that the structure of relations between elements in the outer
(source) domain can be applied in the target domain. It is asserted that there
can be “a common causal schema” (Cornelissen and Durand, 2014: 1002)
underlying both domains. Reasoning by causal analogy in efforts to develop
organization theories could include trying out whether observed causal rela-
tionships between elements in the source domain have their representation
in the relationships between elements in the domain of organization (such
as actors, governing principles, technology, work processes, connections to
the environment, etc.). The third is constitutive analogy, which refers to
the import of “large parts, if not the entirety, of a representation of the
source domain, including its key vocabulary, base assumptions, and under-
lying causal structure” (Cornelissen and Durand, 2014: 1003). One of the
few examples of a constitutive analogy in organization theory is the brain
(or mind), which has been an underlying and formative model in many
works in organization theory (Morgan 1980; Beer, 1981; Walsham, 1991).
For example, Morgan (1980) came close to suggesting a full import of the
image of the brain to develop a theory of modern organizations: “In the
longer term, it is possible to see organizations becoming synonymous with
their information systems, since microprocessing facilities create the pos-
sibility of organizing without having an organization in physical terms”
(Morgan, 1986: 84).

In their analysis of 24 major theoretical breakthroughs in organization
and management studies, Cornelissen and Durand (2014) found the use of
heuristic analogies in eight theories. They registered usage of causal analo-
gies in only three of the 24 theories and found no usage of constitutive

analogy.


ion Theory of Knowledge

74 ATranslat
on theory of knowledge

Borrowing for å translati
transfer

organization theor

structure and illuminate © transfe,

it ig to some extent also an ex post interpret,

tion of how my own ideas about a new theory of knowledge transfer have

emerged.

The two domains from which the analogies and metaphors are borrowed

are translation studies, which was originally a pure linguistic research tra.
dition, and the French/Scandinavian translation theory within Organization
theory, referred to here as organizational translation. It is quite common for
theories of organizations to be complex constructs that are based on multiple
analogies and metaphors from various outer domains (Andriessen and Gub.
bins, 2009; Oswick et al., 201 1). However, in most cases, such borrowings ate
not made explicit by the authors (Cornelissen and Durand, 2014).

There are two reasons for choosing to use two foreign domains to develop
a translation theory of knowledge transfer. First, it provides a richer base for
theory development. According to Cornelissen and Kafouros (2008) "Where
a single metaphor provides a schematic representation, combining multiple
metaphors leads to ‘rich’ images or scenes that can be extended and elabo.
rated” (p. 972). Together, translation studies, organizational translation, and
the stock of existing knowledge transfer literature provide three input spaces
for developing such a theory. Second, translation studies and organizational
translation have much in common, in the sense that the concept of transla.
tion defines the center in both domains. Thus, the concept of translation has
the characteristics of a root metaphor, which is “a fundamental image of the
world on which one is focusing” (Alvesson, 1993: 116), and which, in this.
case, connects the two outer domains. However, these domains are also suf.

ficiently different to provide competing as well as complementary inputs to
the theory-development process,

Within the literature on metaphor imports to organization theory, a
highlighted theme is questions about the semantic distance, or closeness,
between the domains from which the metaphor stem and the target domain
(Tourangeau and Sternberg 1981; 1982; Chiappe et. al., 2003; Cornelissen and
Kafouros, 2008). Cornelissen and Durand (2012) argue for the appropriate-
ness of a fairly large distance between source and target domains, because this


A å
ntecedents of a Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 75

creases the chances of gaining completely new and revelatory insights. O
the other hand, Whetten et al. (2009) warned against a “lack of ; ment
tivity (P. 542) when borrowing metaphors from domains far ive re a
jomain. It can lead borrowers to overlook fundamental differences allel
9 situations Where the organizational researcher lacks thorough knowledge
about the outer domain; such as in cases of borrowing to organization theory
fom biology (Røvik, 2011).

The two outer domains chosen to borrow from in this study have slightly
different distances to the target domain of knowledge transfer between
organizational units. The French/Scandinavian camp (Organizational trans-
lation) is closest. It has a strong heritage from actor-network theory (ANT),
which can be classified as a sociological and philosophical school of thought.
However, the early influence of Scandinavian scholars from the mid-1990s
has contributed to the definition of this research tradition as a member of
the family of organization theories. The domain of translation studies is at
a longer distance to the field of knowledge transfer between organizations.
Coined in the early 1970s, it was originally a pure linguistic research tradition,
which was later transformed to a school of thought increasingly concerned
with studies of communication processes at large.

The saliency of domains

The features of the two source domains will be compared with the target
domain (knowledge transfer across organizational borders) with reference to
Ortony’s (1979a; 1979b) seminal works on salience imbalance in metaphors.
According to the domains-interaction model, applying a metaphor or anal-
ogy initially involves identifying some common features of the source and
the target domains. However, the target domain is almost always viewed
in terms of the typical—or salient—features of the source. Ortony (1979a)
conceptualized a salient feature as a strong and dominant characteristic that
something has. For example, salient features of viruses include infectious-
ness, replication, mutation, and immunity (Rovik, 2011). When applying a
metaphor, the point of departure 1s usually the salient features of the source
domain. This is a situation of imbalance; the target domain is viewed and
interpreted in light of the defining features of a foreign domain. According
to Ortony (1979a), salient “mbalance is a mechanism that can lead to the cre-
ation of novel insights. With salient source features as lenses, one can identify
and reinforce features of the target domain that were previously considered


ge Tra nsfer

ced, and thus stimulate the development or å

| Le noti
onsalient, or even not arget (Readence et. al, 1984; Røvik, 29 LY)

insi t
concepts and insights about the

A generic structure for a translation theory
f knowledge transfer based on importa.

ins is to establish a generic str
m two ou main | UCture
tion of metaphors fro | take place. This work starts here. Initially, i
foreign domains (that is, metaphors from

translation studies and organizational translation) with the target domain,

zational borders—looking for structy
f knowledge transfer across organiza tes
% prs v parallel (Cornelissen, 2005). If/when such parallels are found.

they may together constitute å generic structure that provide a basis for fyr.

ther development of meaning and insights that go beyond identifying and
mere mapping of similarities between the domains. Some basic parallel stry¢.
from the two foreign domains with the target

tures that unify metaphors |
fy o sight when the involved domains are

domain of knowledge transfer come t ved
compared in light of general and simple models of communication. Standard

presentations of communication models highlights their four main elements,
which is source unit, transfer processes, barriers, and recipient unit (Craig,
1999; Lunenburg, 2010). These four elements are all represented and can
be observed in the two foreign domains—as well as in the target domain,

Thus, they provide a first step in establishing a generic structure for corre-
spondence and comparisons across these domains. From this frame of four

corresponding main elements sets of appurtenant features can be derived,
thereby constituting even more detailed structures that parallel and con-

nect the foreign and the target domains—and thus, preparing the ground for
the theory development process. For example, SOURCE UNITS in various

domains where communication takes place, contain and can be compared in

relation to appurtenant elements of source-based actors, practices, technolo-

gies, images/ideas, meaning-structures, and typical features of the context

that surround the source. The second element in the generic structure is THE
TRANSFER PROCESS, that is, processes by which a message is conveyed
between source and recipient. Common characteristic elements across the
involved domains are a) transferors (actors involved in transfer processes), b)
encoding (or decontextualization), that is, processes to make a transferable
representation of a source practice/idea, c) decoding (or contextualization),
that is, efforts to make information out of the coded conveyed message thal
is meaningful for the recipients, d) transfer channels, that is, the medium by
which the message is conveyed. The third element is BARRIERS, which refers

involves comparing the outer

Fr SPE ee ee eee å

eee ee 7 = —


Antecedents of a Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 77

to factors that have the potential to impede and/or distort the transfer process.
The fourth element is the RECIPIENT UNIT which, in principle, contains

the same appurtenant elements as the source units, such as recipient-based
actors, he technologies, images/ideas, meaning-structures, and typical
features of the context that surround the recipient. Figure 3.1 compiles and

highlights the elements seen as parallel across the involved domains.

Figure 3.1 Generic model of parallel transfer structures in outer
and target domains

EEE EEE EEE TE TE En SN a EY Se

1. Source unit

- Source-based actors, practices, technologies, images/ideas,
meaning-structures,

- Typical features of the context that surround the source.
2. The transfer process

- Transferors (actors involved in transfer processes)

- Encoding and decoding processes.

- Transfer channels

- Transfers (message being transferred)

3. Barriers
(Factors that impede and/or distort the flow (information, objects) between

source and target units)

4, Recipient unit
- Recipient-based actors, practices, technologies, images/ideas,

meaning-structures, and typical features of the context that surround the

recipient.

The generic structure of parallel elements outlined above constitutes a cogni-
tive infrastructure that connects the domains and lays the ground for imaging
the target domain of organizational knowledge transfers in light of salient

features of the two outer domains.
This simple “skeleton” model of parallel structures provides the basis for

the next step, which is further elaboration and detailing of the generic struc-
ture. This will take the form of a process of filling in insights, notions,
and ideas from the two foreign domains (Translation studies and Organi-
zational translation). In doing so, I first present the two foreign domains.
Then the salient features of these domains—which is the seeds to a translation
theory of knowledge transfer—will be identified and described through-
out the remaining part of this chapter. The theory-developing process then
continues in the next three chapters—with the blending and the emergence

of meaning—phases.


r
78 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfe

The domain of translation studies

he biblical origin myth of the Tower of Babel (Genesis 11,
anslation across different languages is almost ag 4

as mankind. Initially, the myth says; there was a united humanity Speak.
ing one language that everybody understood. However, the people decid. ;

to defy God by planning to build a tower SO tall that it would reach int,
heaven. This was a great sin. In response, God confounded their Speaking

so that they could not understand each other, and scattered them around the

According to t
1-9), the need for tr

world. |
| old as humanity, the systematic Study of

horter history. The first known attempt to develop
ero’s from the first century BC, entitled “p,

finibus honorum et malorum” (*The ends of good and evil')—and “De optima
Genere Oratorum” (“On the best kinds of Orators ). Translators reflecting on

the challenges of their profession is not å NEW endeavor. For example, in »

work published in 1661, Huet analyzed the principles and practices of great
translators of the Antiquity (Lefevere, 1992). Especially Bible translation—

which began as early as the Greco-Roman period and has been a huge and
challenging (even life-threatening) task for translators—has stimulated much

reflection and discussion within the church and among professional trans-
lators (Stine, 1990; Woodsworth, 1998). However, translation studies as an
academic research field was not established until the late 1970s and early

1980s. James Holmes, a Netherlands-based American scholar, is widely rec-

ognized as the founder of the academic discipline. He also coined the generic
term “translation studies” in his seminal 1972 article entitled “The Name and

Nature of Translation Studies.” Holmes defined translation studies as the dis-
cipline concerned with the study of translations at large, including literary
and nonliterary translations, various forms of oral interpreting, as well as

dubbing and subtitling (Baker, 1998: 277). Holmes mapped and defined the
terrain of translation studies to consist of a “pure” and an “applied” branch.

The pure branch is subdivided into descriptive translation studies (concerned
with describing various acts of translations as they de facto occur), (Toury,
1995) and translation theory (the developing and testing of theories to under-
stand and explain acts of translations) (Malmkjær, 2013). The applied part is
concerned with various practical matters, such as translator education and
training.
han last three decades, translation studies has been established as
panding academic field. It is expressed in several ways, such as in the

translation has a much s
a theory of translation 1s Cic


t
3
[
|
i

An |
tecedents of a Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 79

extensive supply of encyclopedias, handboo

studies (Kelly and Kelly, 1979; Baker, 1998; Gambier and Van Doorsl

3010; Venuti, 2012; Munday, 2013; Millan and Bartrina 2013; Williams al
Chesterman, 2014). Å range of international journals have been estabi hed
to facilitate publishing of scientific works from the field, such as Text Content
(1986); Target (1988), and The Translator (1995). The professionalization and
‘nstitutionalization of the field have also been strengthened by the establish-
ment of international professional networks and associations, such as EST
(European Society for Translation Studies), and ATISA (American Trans-
lation and Interpretive Studies Association). The scientification of the field
also comes to expression in the expansion of university translation-study
programs. At least 150 universities in five continents have established such

programs, most frequently within language departments (Lambert, 2013).

Six salient features of translation studies

According to Ortony (1979a; 1979b), a generic framework for an analogy
or metaphor-based theory of a target domain should be based on an ini-
tial mapping of the salient features of the source domain. Based on extensive
readings and interviews, six aspects stand out as the most prominent and
defining features of the domain of translation studies. These are (1) transla-
tion as decontextualization and contextualization, (2) norms of translations,
(3) rules of translations, (4) barriers to translations, (5) the role of translators,
and (6) translation competence. Inevitably, there are elements of judgment
and selections involved when features are chosen for such a list of the most
salient features. However, the six selected aspects are undoubtedly central
characteristics of the domain of translation studies, For example, they fre-

quently appear as headings (with various labels) and occupy large sections
in encyclopedias and readings in translation studies. Together, these features

constitute the core of the domain.

Translation as decontextualization and contextualization

In its simplest definition, translation refers to putting what is written or said

in one language into another language. Complexity increases if the concept

of meaning—that translation is “the conveying of meaning from one lan-
guage to another” —is introduced into the definition (Hermans, 2013: 75). The

definition becomes even more complex if the notion of different contexts is


80 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer
ation as the mediation of meaning between a jac
Ure

context and a target context. In linguistic terms, pp / efers to What is liter.
ally written or said, while “context” is the surrounding, In which the tey, ,

| | itj ing to the text. |
hich provides additional meaning n analve:
embedded and which P highly intertwined processes. One is deco.

terms, a translation contains two 11 E |
textualization, which refers to the disembedding of the text from the conteys
which refers to bringing the text acrog, ,

O

The other is contextualization, |
make it comprehensible in the target context language while Preserving jt,

source-context meaning. |
The text-context relationship is relevant at different levels of analysis The
he context can be the sentence (clause) å

text can be a single word and t |
hether that is a chapter (text) in a book

paragraph within which it appears, W chay
context or a poem (text), and how it relates to the writer's authorship and/o,

ext), A synonym for “text” is the concept “unit of translation”

which refers to the source text that the translator focuses upon and tries %
e in the target language (Lörscher, 1993: 209; Malmkjær

represent as a whol
translators will, to various extents, consider the context

1998). In doing so,
‘4 which the chosen unit of translation appears.
During the 1980s, translation studies was transformed through what was

later referred to as the cultural turn (Lefevere and Bassnett, 1990; Snel}.
Hornby, 2006). The most common denominator of this turn was a new aware.
ness among scholars—followed by attempts to understand and theorize—
regarding the role of the entire social context involved in translations, such

as norms, beliefs, conventions, ideologies, and values (Vermeer, 1978; 1986;
Toury, 1980; 1985; Hermans, 1985/2014; Bassnett and Lefevere, 1990), A

main expression of this turn was the introduction of new ideas regarding
what should be the unit of translation in translation studies. While the com-

mon and accepted translation unit is texts (words and/or sentences), cultural

turn agents argued for a radical expansion of the translation object “beyond
language,’ which, in principle, included all kinds of cultural/human expres-

sions (Hönig and Kufsmaul, 1982; Vermeer, 1986). In Lefevere and Bassnett’s
(1990) formulation, this means “neither the word, nor the text, but the culture

becomes the operational unit of translation” (p. 8). An important implica-
tion is that translators should be sensitive to much more than words. They

should also be able to make target-context representations of source versions
of various social constructs, such as values, beliefs, norms, habits, etc. In this
expanded and transformed sense, “translation means cross-cultural under-
standing” (Rubel and Rosman, 2003: 1). The cultural turn radically expands
the role and increases challenges for translators, An important consequence

brought in; that is, trans!

a genre (cont


Antecedents of a Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 81

ig that it does not suffice for translators to be bilingual—they must also be
bicultural in order to master the challenges.

Norms of translation

Another salient feature of translation studies is the persistent discussions
among its scholars about the norms of translations, which include ques-
tions about the overall purpose of translations and about what should be the
yardsticks for evaluating the quality of concrete translations.

The Israeli scholar Gideon Toury coined the concept “norms of trans-
lations” and thoroughly researched the subject (Toury, 1978; 1980; 1984).
Toury argued that translation norms vary across historical periods and cul-
tural contexts. He conceptualized translators as social actors who operate
under the influence of different translation norms in different socio-cultural
contexts. Thus, these different norms are likely to be expressed in variations
in regularities of translations across various contexts. According to Toury,
there are two main and partly competing norms that influence translation
practices. One is adherence to the source, and the other is adherence to the
target texts and context. In this connection, Toury introduced two appur-
tenant concepts: a translation’s adequacy versus its relevance. While the norm
of adherence to the source increases a translation’s adequacy, adherence to
the target is likely to increase its relevance for the target context (Baker,
1998: 164).

An antecedent of the norm of translators’ adherence to the source is the old
tradition of literal translation, also named metaphrase (Robinson 1998a), or
simply, word-for-word translation. The text to be translated should be seg-
mented into its single words, and the translator's duty is then to search for
the exact target-language word copy of each source-language word. The lit-
eral translation ideal was succinctly formulated by Russian-American author

and translator Vladimir Nabokov: “The person who decides to turn a liter-
ally masterpiece into another language has only one duty to perform, and this
is to reproduce with absolute exactitude the whole text and nothing but the
text. The term ‘literal translation’ is tautological, since anything but that is not
truly a translation, but an imitation, an adaptation or a parody” (Nabokov,
1955/1992: 134),

The norm of adherence to the source also comes to expression in more
recent debates, for example about the concept of equivalence in translations
(Nida, 1964; Catford, 1965; Koller, 1989; Snell-Hornby, 2006). Equivalence is
usually defined as “the relationship between a source text (ST) and a target


eory of Knowledge Tra nsfer
e TT to be considered a translation of the ST Gå
e

first place” (Kenny; 1998: 77). Denotative equivalerice Is a translation idea]
that resembles literal translation, where equivalence increases with the trane.

lator's ability to find the exact word-copy in the target language for the actual

source language word (Catford, 1965; Koller, 1989). Connotative €quivalenc.
‘1 that the translator's duty is to makea translation

sa slightly different ideal, i
is a slightly di t language words and phrases should more or le
y both source and target language users thi

ideal has been further elaborated by translator theorist and bible translato,
Eugene Nida (1964) and conceptualized as dynamic equivalence’ Equiva.
lence, in its various versions, means adherence to the source, in the sense that
it is an ideal that limits the translator’s degrees of freedom to depart from the

source text when rendering it in a target language.
According to Toury, a translation’s relevance for the target context actors

depends on the translator's adherence to the target while translating, Both
Horace (65-68 BC) and Cicero (106-143 BC) warned against litera] word.

for-word translation. They argued for a less slavish rendering of the source
text and for more concern among translators about how the translated texts

works in the target context. Much more recent and strong voices in favor

of target-oriented translations came in the late 1970s and early 1980s in
connection with the cultural turn. One of these has been dubbed “the manip-

ulation school.” which was a group of researchers with Belgian scholar, Theo
Hermans, at the center. In a widely cited book entitled “The manipulation

of literature” that Hermans edited (1985/2014), he stated, “All translation

implies a certain degree of manipulation of the source text for a certain pur-
pose” (p. 11). Toury, who also was a member of the this group, formulated

the essence of the norm of translators’ adherence to the target context as fol-
lows: “Translators operate first and foremost in the interest of the culture into
which they are translating, and not in the interest of the source text, let alone
the source culture” (Toury, 1985: 19).

Similar ideas were launched from another group of scholars who almost
simultaneously, and centered on the German linguist Hans Vermeer, were
concerned with developing the so-called Skopos theory (Vermeer, 1978;
Honig and Kussmaul, 1982; Reiss and Vermeer, 1984). Skopos is a Greek word
meaning purpose”; in this context, the purpose of a translation. The basic
normative premise of Skopos theory is that it is not the source text as such
that should determine the translation process (as opposed to the norm of
equivalence).

The skopos, or prospective function of a translation, should be determined
by the “clients”; that is, the target context actors (Hönig and Kussmaul, 1982).

82 ATranslation Th

text (TT) that allows th

trigger the same associa

mr


Antecedents of a Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 83

Skopos scholars (also referred to as “the functionalist school”) focus on lit-
erary and nonliterary texts. Especially when translating nonliterary texts
such as tourist guides (Schaffner, 1998), scientific papers and instructions
(Olohan, 2017), news (Holland, 2017), advertising (Valdés, 2017), children’s
literature (O'Sullivan, 2017), and sacred texts (Long, 2017), it is important for

the translator to be knowledgeable about and to consider the target context
in order to make a translation that functions well there.

Rules of translations

Although Cicero conceived of translation as an art and of translators as artists
with very special skills, translation is also a highly rule-based professional and
academic field. A translation rule can be defined as an established principle
that serves as a guideline for translation practice. Although it can be difficult
to distinguish between norms and rules, there are differences. While dis-
cussions of translation norms mostly relate to fundamental questions about
the values, ethics, and purpose of translations, the main domain of trans-
lation rules is the practical and operational level—rules as helpful devices
for problem-solving when the translator must make decisions about how to
translate a concrete text (and often smaller parts of it). However, there is a
continuum between norms and rules. For example, at the intermediate level
on this continuum it is reasonable to place Venuti’s (1995; 1998) concept of
“translation strategies” which refers to the choice of method for translating
an entire text. Venuti outlined two main groups of strategies, which resem-
bles Toury’s two norms of adherence, either to the source or to the target. One
is domesticating strategies, which means that the translator decides to adjust
the text to fit in with the target context. The other is foreignizing, which means

striving for high fidelity in relation to the source and preserving linguistic and
cultural differences in relation to the target in the translated version.

There is a multitude of translation rules. They are, to various degrees,
clearly and consistently conceptualized, shared, known, agreed upon, and
used by translators. There has been a relatively rich supply of attempts to clas-
sify and to make typologies of translation rules. Vinay and Darbelnet's (1958)
typology is among the most cited and acknowledged. They sorted out the fol-
lowing seven main types of translation rules: (a) borrowing, which involves
using a certain passage in the original source-text untranslated in the tar-
get version; (b) calque, which means borrowing a word or a phrase from
the source text, while translating its components into the target language,
but preserving the structure of the source language; (c) literal translation,


mi BI

84 A Translation Theory of Knowled

d-for-word translation; (d) transposition, vile

d-class by another word-class without ie le

he target-transposed version; (e) mo due
i

which means finding å phrase in the target mat cifferent from fy,
corresponding source text, but which eater e name ea; (f ) equivalenc,
or reformulation, which involves using very CAI ad expressions to transmis
the same reality in the target text language as in the source text lan

BUage;
(g) adaptation, which is the mos

ge Transfer

which is the classic wor
the replacement of a wor
the source text meaning IN t

t radical rule, sometimes calle ‘culty, )
| a

substitution,’ and means adjusting the text so that it better fits the target Con.
text (Bastin, 2008). Another frequently cited classification is Nida’s ( 1964
echniques to adjust a source text to a target Contex:

ologv of three main t
typology raction, and alteration, which resembles Barkhy

These are addition, subt å sem
darov’s (1975) adaptation typology of transposition, substitution, addition

and omission. | Em] p
Translators may deliberately assess a variety of rules an choose the One

that is best suited to each concrete case. However, translation rules May also
be taken for granted and become translation habits. Such habits can come to
expression in specific national translation traditions, such as the French tra.
dition (Salama-Carr, 1998) and the German tradition (Kittel and Poltermann,

1998).

Barriers to translations

A fourth salient feature of translation studies is the strong consciousness
and discourse within the domain about translation barriers; that is, factors
with the potential to impede and/or distort the translated target version of a
source text. Translation barriers are frequently associated with instances of
considerable imbalance or differences between source context/text and tar-
get context/text. They are often of three main kinds: barriers stemming from
considerable language differences, from considerable cultural differences, ot
from considerable power imbalances.

Differences between the source and target languages are, in themselves, å
main translation barrier. When the source and target languages are extremely
different (for example, English versus Chinese), it is often challenging for
translators to find equivalent expressions of the source text in the target lan-
guage. Thus, a recurring debate within this domain is about whether some
texts are untranslatable (Wilss, 1982; Koskinen, 1994; Baer, 2020). Linguisti
ee. to the property of a text for which there can hardly be

when it is translated into another language. According

—


Antecedents of a Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 85

to Bassnett (2002: 39), linguistic untranslatability means that there is a lack
of syntactical or lexical substitute for source language in the target language.
Cultural untranslatability is likely to occur when it is impossible, or at least
very hard, to find relevant features of the contextual meaning from the source
text in the target context (Catford, 1965). However, absolute linguistic and/or
cultural untranslatability is rare, it is usually more reasonable to talk about
low translatability (Pym and Turk, 1998). There are also techniques (or rules)
that translators can use to cope with low-translatable texts—and even texts
considered in the first place to be untranslatable. One such rule is com-
pensation, which involves making up for a source text's effect being lost in
translation by recreating a similar effect in the target text by means that are
specific to the target language and context.

A third type of translation barrier stems from various kinds of power
imbalances between source and target contexts. Asymmetrical source-target
relations are often based on political, economic, ideological, or religious fac-
tors. In most cases, the imbalance comes to expression in expectations, or
even claims, that the target context will change and adapt a source text so
that it fits in with the dominant and accepted ways of thinking and acting
within the target context. For example, in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries (the age of French classicism), translators were instructed to change
classic source texts to fit in with French literary fashions, norms, and moral-
ity (Berman, 1992). Likewise, in the Soviet-Marxist period, translators were
expected to make ideologically “correct” target versions of foreign source
texts (Fawcett, 1998; Inggs, 2011).

Sometimes the translation barriers are created by the source cöfitext. For
example, the Quran, the holy book of Islam, is considered to be divine in
nature, and therefore untranslatable for humans. Thus, Koran translations are

restricted and traditionally conceived of as illegitimate (Mustapha, 1998).

The translator

One of the most salient features of translation studies is its persistent and
strong focus on the role of the translator. This reflects that the translator is one
of the best-known and institutionalized roles in the history of humankind.
Thus, the interest in this role goes far beyond translation studies. Obviously,
it reflects that translators have always been the main keys to communication

across languages and cultures, and also that they—to varying degrees—put
their marks on the translated versions of source texts. Discussions within

translation theory about translators’ roles are partly premised on normative


ory of Knowledge Transfer

ts (that is arguments about what should be considered AS appro.
ents at 1S, ia inappropriate and not legitimate roles), and

nd descriptions (what translators actual]
four such frequently dise /

86 A Translation The

argum
priate and acceptable vers |
partly on empirical observations a rae
do when they translate). a this overview;
re identified. a |
gre translator as a code switcher. This is the ideal of the ter
d and sense for sense—a pure copycat wy,

ies word for wor a |
translator who cop m the original Source text in the target

ing fro
neither adds nor subtracts anything | | i
version. Thus, according to this ideal, a high-quality translation should not

look like a translation. The translator should be invisible, leaving no traces in
the translation; his/her duty is limited to switch the language code Of a source
text to another language. Within this tradition, the copycat ideal IS Often con.
trasted to a nondesirable role: the not-faithful translator. This is most clearly

expressed in the popular Italian proverb traduttore, traditore, which means
translator, you are a betrayer. This ideal has been held especially high in the

translation of sacred texts, sometimes with severe consequences for trans-
lators who failed to live up to this ideal. For example, the English scholar

William Tynsdale, who was the first to translate the Bible into English from
Hebrew texts, was accused of "false translations and heresy” and was executed

in 1536.
The second translator role is the ideal one, of a translator as a creatiye

artist. Cicero was the first to formulate this ideal in his conceptualization of
translation as exprimere imitando. In English, the word “imitation” is often
associated with copying. However, the meaning of this concept within trans-

lation theory is almost quite the opposite: not copying, but doing something
very different from the original (Robinson, 1998b). This is also the meaning

that Cicero attached to the concept; that is, creating something new under
inspiration of something already existing. The literal meaning of the term
exprimere is “to squeeze out something” (Robinson, 1998b: 112), which indi-
cates that although the translator must relate to the source text, s/he is also
allowed and requested to omit elements of it in order to innovate while imi-
tating. This artistic way of translating a source text has been compared to
playing a musical composer's composition: “A good translation offers not a
reproduction of the work, but an interpretation, a re-representation, just as
the performance of a play or a sonata is a representation of the script or the
score, one among many possible representations” (Polizzotti, 2018).

The third role conceptualizes the translator as an intercultural commu-
nicator. The cultural turn in translation studies in the early 1980s brought
new ideas and ideals for the role of a translator. It represented a break with
the “old” translator ideal as an equivalence-seeking language code-switchet

USsed


Antecedents of a Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 87

instead, the translator should conceive of the source text ag only means to
, new text, which should be adopted to and function in the target culture
(Vermeer; 1978). German-born Finnish translation researcher Justa Holz-
Månttåri's theory of “translatorial action” (1984) represents an influential
and even more radical approach to the role of the translator. She argued for
reduced focus on the role of the source text as well as on language if one
strives to understand what really goes onin many translation processes. Mod-
ern translators, she argued, are involved in communication processes across
cultural borders where language is only one of a number of means of com-

munication. Snell-Hornby succinctly illustrated the concrete implications of
such a translator role with the following anecdote:

A Finnish client (such as the head of the marketing department of a firm produc-
ing electrical equipment) needs an English (or German or Arabic) version of the
instructions for use of a washing machine. His aim is of course to market the wash-
ing machine in the countries concerned. As he has no command of their languages
himself, he commissions a translator with the job, providing him/her with the
instructions for use in Finnish. The task of this translator is to produce a text, which
the English /German/Arabic buyers of the washing machine can understand so that
they really use the machine. To do this, s/he may need to check internal details
with the marketing manager or, particularly in the case of Arabic, to find out fur-
ther information about the envisaged user (including cultural implications), about
possible market restrictions as regards spare parts, or about legal implications
concerning the guarantee. In any case, a good deal of cooperation with the firm
(and maybe other specialists) is involved, the translator does not operate in isola-
tion. What is not required is an exact reproduction of the sentences or grammatical
structures in the Finnish text, as this may not help the English/German/Arabic user
to operate the washing machine—and maybe part of the verbal text is in fact bet-
ter rendered in the form of a diagram or sketch. If the text eventually enables the
user to operate the machine, the immediate purpose of the translation has been
reached, and the firm’s ultimate purpose will be achieved if such texts help to boost
their sales. The aim of the translation therefore lies outside the linguistic content

of their source text.
(Snell-Hornby, 2006: 58)

The fourth translator role is that of a decision-maker. Contrary to sim-
ple language code-switching, which can be automatized and sometimes
machine-performed, studies of translators’ actual behavior indicate that they

are, throughout a translation process, often exposed to numerous problems
and alternative solutions, and have to make choices under various degrees

vo Grae DE ee eee SE ee ee ee eee
a =D ms Sr Ga —— "

2” eee

-— 7 C }Rt

Transfer
88 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge

2015), Texts often contain ambiguous elemen
rently and rendered differently in another Jap
anslator must make choices about the

ts that
BUage

OVeral

of uncertainty (Pym:
could be interpreted diffe
According to Wilss (1998), å tr

| for the tota |
translation strategy tication), as well as choices about the

‘foreioniZi d domes
degree of foreignizing å! dering of Uriiited part
context, which refers to the concrete ren parts of the text

(paragraphs, sentences, words, etc.). Most ker — that ‘Translator,
face are located at this level; for example, cha pi r anslating Com.
plex syntax, semantics vagueness, and metaphors and 1d10ms (Baker, 1992)
In such situations there are usually no tr anslation manuals offering exact
answers (Fox, 2000). Nevertheless, translators must assess available alterna.
tives and make numerous choices. The observation that different translators
often arrive at different solutions when translating the same source

Translation competence

Closely related to translators’ roles is the sixth salient feature of the domain
of translation studies, which is questions about translation competence.
Throughout the history of translations there has been a prevailing discourse
about the kind of competence that translators should possess, and how the
competence should best be achieved (Toury, 1986; Schaffner and Adab, 2000;
Hurtado Albir, 2015). However, unlike many other themes and questions
within the domain of translation studies, there has been a relatively high
degree of consensus regarding what constitutes a competent translator. The
four main elements of translation competence can be summarized as follows.
The first element is bilingualism. Obviously, the competent translator
must master both the source and target languages. However, there is also
widespread agreement on the primacy of excellent mastery of the target
language (Presas, 2000; Pym, 2017). Although complete bilingualism is an
ideal, most translators are aware that knowledge of the source and target |
languages is usually asymmetric (Lonsdale, 1998), which tends to influ-
ence the direction of translations. In practice, most translators translate

from a source language to a target language, which is their own mother
tongue.

The second element is translators’ knowledge of translation norms and rules
To be a professional translator, it is not sufficient to be fluid in the source


Antecedents of a Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 89

and target languages. The translator must also be conscious about various
norms and values involved in translations and, above all, must possess thor-
ough knowledge about various translation procedures and rules, and be able
to choose the appropriate rules in relation to concrete translation challenges
(Wilss, 1996; Neubert, 2000).

The third element is biculturalism. The translator should be knowledgeable
about both the source text's and the target text's contexts, and should be able
to deliberately decontextualize the text from the source context, as well as to
make a translation that fits into the target context. However, this expanded
demand on translators’ competence—which is a central element of the cul-
tural turn in the 1980s and 1990s (Witte, 1987; Snell-Hornby, 2006)—is hard
to live up to for the practicing translator. Cultures are complex; they con-
tain much more than language and are usually difficult to come into terms
with, even for professional anthropologists (Geertz, 1973). In addition to
complexity, cultures are often described as being unique in character, which
anthropologist and linguist Edward Sapir succinctly formulated as follows:
“The worlds in which different societies live, are distinct worlds, not merely
the same world with different labels attached. Each linguistic community has
its own perception of the world, which differs from that of other linguistic
communities, and implies the existence of different worlds determined by
language” (Sapir, 1929/1949). The uniqueness of cultural contexts increases
challenges for the translator, since understanding one or a few contexts does
not necessarily qualify a translator to translate between other cultural con-
texts. Another challenge for translators who are supposed to consider cultural
contexts and not only language is the vagueness of the frequently used con-
cept of cultural context. For example, there is a tendency within translation
studies to equate “contexts” with “cultural context; which is actually reduc-
tionism, because the elements of the source and the target that a translator
must be sensitive and knowledgeable about when translating contain much
more than just “culture.” For example, translating into another language often
means entering into a new national context and relevant translator knowl-

edge can encompass knowledge about political institutions and traditions,
public administration, geography, media, etc.

The fourth and final element is knowledge about the subject matter, which
refers to the translator’s knowledge of the material, or subject, that is being
translated. This is a demand on translator’s knowledge that goes beyond the
traditional demands on bilingualism and biculturalism. It is rather easy to
argue for the necessity of subject matter competence, For example, trans-

lating a document about cardiology or about advances in green technology
able to find the correct and equivalent technical

requires that the translator is


sfer
90 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Tran

guage. The volume of specialized translation

inne’ ciated target lan (nis
terms in the asso , s increasing demands for specialized Subject

is increasing rapidly, which bring
-translation competence. | | |
matter-tra P ome able to gain and live up to the ideal o¢

1 translators in spe bec co
How cal translators have been trained informally

translator? Usually, |
wevet; as early as the fifteenth and sixteenth

lized translator training, often in order to

‘ ’ d 4
secure translation competence in natlons foreign as The last 60 years
have seen a strong tendency to academize translation education and training,

Most of the initial translation training is NOW carried out by universities and
other institutions of higher education and research (Anderman and Rogers,

2000). This development is evidenced by Caminade and Pym (1998), who
identified a considerable rise in the number of universities that offer degrees

or diplomas in translating and/or interpreting—from 49 in 1960 to 180 in

1980 and at least 250 in 1994.

the competent
outside academic institutions. Ho

centuries, many states institutiona

The domain of organizational translation

While translation studies is the primary external domain to provide an input
space for a translation theory of knowledge transfer, the secondary domain is
the research field of organizational translation. This field has strong French

and Scandinavian origins. An important antecedent is contributions from
French scholars working within the traditions referred to as “the sociology of
translation” and actor-network theory (ANT), especially Serres (1974/1982),
Latour (1983; 1986; 1987), and Callon (1986). Inspired by these works, Czar-
niawska and colleagues introduced some of their core ideas to organization

theory throughout the 1990s (Czarniawska and Joerges, 1996; Czarniawska
and Sevön, 1996; 2005; Rottenburg, 1996; Sahlin-Andersson, 1996; Sevön,

1996; Rovik, 1998). This opened a new avenue to study and improve under-
standing of the circulation (or “travel”) of various organizational ideas in time
and space. Thus, it has now been recognized and widely accepted as a distinct
theoretical approach and school of thought in organization research (Green-
wood et al., 2008; Spyridonidis et al., 2014; Wedlin and Sahlin, 2017; Claus
et al., 2021.

The translation approach to such phenomena contrasts with the diffu-
sion model, which builds on images of physical laws of energy, speed
motion and inertia, and which, according to Latour (1986), also perme:
ates social sciences in general. Organizational translation researchers offer


art EE sr EL pr add ’ ‘Cae asa

Ante
cedents of a Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 91

premised on two interrelated arguments

The first argument Spposes the diffusion-inspired image of how ideas
spread oetwenn organizations, It is the image of a central powerful broad-
casting point (for example, government agencies, large consultancies, or
multinational corporations) that provides all the energy to the diffusion over
cess, and an appurtenant image of passive receiving organizations (Sevön,
1996; Powell et al., 2005). In contrast, organizational translation researchers
argue that the power behind the travel of ideas between organizations stems
not from one powerful central agent, but from the richness of interpretations
that the idea triggers in each actor within a given network (Callon, 1986;
Latour, 1986). Receivers fuel the spreading process with new energy; thus,
actors are active translators, not passive receivers, Put bluntly, the power to
the spreading process is the result, not the cause of the circulation of ideas
between.

The second core argument from the field of organizational translation
concerns the objects that spread between organizations. Here, organiza-
tional translation theorists have challenged the physical “thing” and “fixed
object” —images of spreading ideas—that is present in various diffusion stud-
ies within organization theory (Whittle et al., 2010; Røvik, 2016). In contrast,
translation researchers have theorized disseminated constructs as ideas, or as
“quasi objects” (Czarniawska and Joerges, 1996), that are continually shaped
and reshaped as they circulate in, and between, organizations (Andersen

and Rovik, 2015). These idea-shaping processes are depicted as processes of
translation.

Five salient features of organizational translation

When conceiving of organizational translation as a potential source domain
for a translation theory of knowledge transfer between organizations, we
must—as in the case of the primary domain of translation studies—first
map the salient features of this secondary domain. Based on extensive read-
ings and the author's special knowledge of this field of research (Rovik,
1998; 2007; 2016; 2019), five features stand out as the most domain-defining
ones. These are: (1) the translation objects, (2) images of the translator,
(3) process orientation, (4) contextualization orientation, and (5) translation

as transformation.


sfer
92 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Tran

the five salient features also offer a reason

able account of how scholars working within ep ne ave approached the
sentral what, who, and how questions associated Wi IS research tradit;
rn What are the objects of translation? (Feature 1). Who are the tra

| n
lators? (Feature 2), and, How are practices a
4, and 5).

Compared with one another,

On,

ns.
d ideas translated? (Features 3

The translation objects

As mentioned above, organizational translation researchers have questioned
the inherent physical images of diffusion in many organization theory stud.
ies. The alternative image offered from the domain of organizational transla-
tion of what “travels” (which is the preferred metaphor instead of diffusion)
is ideas traveling as quasi-objects, such as concepts, speech, pictures, web.

sites, and manuals (Czarniawska and Joerges, 1996). Although translation
researchers have studied very different ideas, the common denominator

is that most of them are organizational ideas, meaning ideas about the
organizing and managing of various organizational activities. The studied
ideas often resemble recipes, in the sense that they provide more or legs
detailed advices about what activities organizations should be involved in,

and how they should be appropriately organized and performed. Transla-
tion researchers have studied the travel of many such ideas. However, most

of these studies have focused on typical macro or master ideas with almost
global reach (Røvik and Pettersen, 2014) and how they are translated in
local contexts. A list of such translation studies includes Management by

Objectives (Stensaker, 2007), Total Quality Management (Giroux and Taylor,
2002; Ozen and Berkman, 2007; Ercek and Say, 2008), Workplace democ-
racy (Børve and Kvande, 2022), Balanced Scorecard (Ax and Björnenak,
2005; 2007; Madsen, 2014), Shareholder Value (Meyer and Höllerer, 2010),
Business Process Reengineering (Heusinkveld et al., 2013), Reputation Man-
agement (Weeraas and Satagen, 2014), Lean (Morris and Landcaster, 2006;
Andersen and Rovik 2015; Larsson, 2019; Hultin et al., 2021), Medical Inno-
vations (Nicolini, 2010), Quality Management Practice (Bausch et al., 2022),
auditing (Mennicken, 2008), Strategic Planning (Hwang and Suarez, 2005),
Manpower planning (Nilsen and Sandaunet, 2020), Media logics (Pallas
et al., 2016), Best Value (Solli et al., 2005), Evidenced-based evaluation
(Elvbakken and Hansen, 2019), the Nordic model (Byrkjeflot et al., 2022)
Leadership concepts (Nielsen et al. 2020), safety concepts (Berling et al»
2022; Karanikas et al., 2022), organizational ethics (Helin and Sandström,

>


An |
tecedents of a Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 93

3010), Quality Improvement (Erlingsdottir and Lindberg, 2005; Mueller and

whittle, 2011), models of leadership: Ab
) r h
accreditation (Hedmo et al., 2005), P ahamsen and Aas, 2016), and

The traveling ideas that translation researchers have concentrated on are, to

varying degrees, representations of concrete, localized organizational prac-
tices. It is often difficult, and sometimes even impossible, to trace the origins
of specific circulating macro ideas to a concrete time, place, and practice
(Rovik, 2002). These are primarily circulating ideas, not carriers of concrete
practices. However, there are also a few studies within this domain which deal
with the transfer of more practice-carrying ideas, An example is Westney and
Piekkaris study (2020) of the movement of Japanese organizational practices

(mainly in the car industry) to the United States from the 1970s through the
mid-1990s.

Images of the translator

A second salient feature of the domain of organizational translation comes
to expression in a persistent focus on the translators; that is, actors involved
in the translation of circulating ideas. An important antecedent of the salient
status of translators is Bruno Latour’s early and precise formulation of a key
insight within this domain. “The spread in time and space of anything—
claims, orders, artefacts, goods—is in the hands of people; each of these
people may act in many different ways, letting the token drop, or modi-
fying it, or deflecting it, or betraying it, or adding to it, or appropriating
it” (Latour, 1986: 267). This formulation, which points at the transforming
power and potential of every single actor involved in the handling of circulat-
ing ideas, has achieved axiomatic status within the domain of organizational
translation.

The image of the translator differs in three important respects between the
domains of translation studies and organizational translation. First, while
the translator in translation studies refers to a fixed, explicit, widely recog-
nized, professionalized, and thus highly institutionalized role, this is not the
case within the domain of organizational translation. In this tradition, to be

a translator is an aspect of a role (Barth, 1963), depicting the enactment of

circulating ideas, which some actors do

recognized roles,
a translator in this sense is also a ro
actors. This means that the actors th
or conceptualize what they are doing as translators.

while performing other explicit and

such as top managers, consultants, etc. To be conceived of as
le that is theoretically ascribed to various

emselves are not necessarily conscious of


94 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

ation studies often image the translators as actors Oper.
ssional neutralism—seeking some kind equiva.
d the translated target version (Nida, 1964)

Second, while trans!
ating under norms of profe

lence between the source text an os mii |
the translator-image in the domain of organizational translation is frequently

of an agent who purse strategies and acts to Ser VE specific interests by creating
certain versions of circulating ideas (Kelemen, 2000; Waldorff and Madsen,
2022). For example, Frenkel (2005b) showed how translators at the state leve]

in Israel acted as agents who emulated special versions of deg American Man-
tific management and human relations, and adapted

litical-institutional power structure of the coup.
d Berkman (2007) showed how an elite group
lated versions of Total Quality Manage.
of a powerful group of Turkish

agement models, scien
them to fit the needs of the po

try. In another study, Ozen an
in Turkey throughout the 1990s trans
ment (TQM) to fit the interests and needs

business and industrial organizations. | |
Third, while the common image of the translator in translation studies is of

a single person who performs the whole translation operation of a text from
a source to a target context, it is quite different within the domain of organi-
zational translation. An organizational translation process usually involves, —
many and different types of actors, both external and internal localized actors,
According to the Latourian axiom mentioned above, everyone who encoun-
ters a circulating idea is, in principle, a translator. In practice, however, some
types of actors are undoubtedly more involved than others. Among exter-

nals, national governmental agencies frequently act as translators when they
transform and regulate macro-ideas into national versions, as observed, for

example, within the Norwegian educational sector (Røvik, 2014; Røvik and
Pettersen, 2014). The most common external located translators are proba-

bly various types of consultants (Crucini and Kipping, 2001; Löfgren, 2005;
Sturdy, 2011; Heusinkveld and Visscher, 2012; Czarniawska and Mazza, 2013;

Engwall and Kipping, 2013; Kirkpatrick et al., 2013; Madsen and Slåtten,
2022). Among the most frequently studied internal translators are staff in
various kinds of research and development units (Lane et al., 2006, Scheuer,
2006; Volberda et al., 2010), HR units (Jiménez-Jiménez and Sanz-Valle,
2005; Slåtten, 2020), quality control units (Scheuer, 2006). However, one of
the most important translation positions in modern organizations is held by
middle managers (Nehez et al., 2022). This point was also made in Radaelli
and Sitton-Kent's (2016) literature review of middle manager research, which
is one of very few studies of a specific group of actors as translators to be
explicitly framed within organizational translation theory. Middle managers
localization “in the middle” provides the potential for the actors in this posi-
tion to be important carriers and translators of ideas and information from

—


Antec |
edents of å Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 95

line level. Radaelli and Sitton-Kent's review reveals that midd!

to å large extent, involved in tasks that share core ssusisnd ni uk
such as idea acquisition, appropriation of translation roles (which sn dl
a middle manager in a given situation may also interpret his/her role as bein
that ofa translator), developing conversations with frontline employees nel
various aspects of incoming ideas, selling their own version of the idea, and
contributing to the implementation and stabilization of the idea. |

Process orientation

The third salient feature of this domain is a strong process orientation, which
comes to expression in efforts to identify, observe, map and theorize what
happens when organizational actors encounter and handle various circulat-
ing organizational ideas. Process-oriented translation studies include works
such as Yanow (2004), Frenkl (2005a), Erlingsdottir and Lindberg (2005),
Powell et al. (2005), Love and Cebon (2008), Jensen, et al. (2009), Demir
and Fjellström (2012), Farquharson, et al. (2014), Ciuk and James (2015),
Lawrence, (2017), Larsson (2019), and Nielsen et al. (2022). Many such works
combine process orientation with a longitudinal approach. For example, for
about ten years, Larsson (2019) studied processes of translating the Lean
concept to practice in the Swedish healthcare sector. She concluded that
translation is something that is going on everywhere and all the time” (p. 3).
Nielsen et al. (2022) drew from a longitudinal 20-year case study to reveal
processes of “translation ecologies” when ideas of mobile technology for care-
givers spread across the entire Danish homecare field. Wedlin and Sahlin

(2017) coined the concept of translation ecology. A strong process orienta-
tion is at the forefront of this concept. They argue that organizational ideas
are shaped through “continuous translation processes both within and out-

side the organizational context” (p. 103), and that such processes are nested
in complex ways and often involve numerous actors and take place at differ-

ent arenas—sometimes also within different fields. The concept of translation
ecology has been further elaborated by other researchers (Nielsen et al., 2022;

Westney et al., 2022).

The strong interest in qualitative process studies obviously reflects this core

idea within this domain—the axiomatic notion of complex translation pro-

cesses where each involved actor who encoun

puts his/her mark on i
of translation are conceived

ters the actual idea enacts and

t, thus modifying and reshaping it. Therefore, acts
of as a key social mechanism that, through its


96 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

core logic, continually leads to variations and pg (Røvik, 2016;
Van Grinsven et al., 2016; Claus et al., 2021). pple! € complexities
involved and the assumed unique character of each trans ation process make
it difficult or impossible to predict the progress an Prem of SUCh pro.
cesses, Therefore, although researchers can have a clear, t eoretically based
understanding of translation processes; this does not necessarily lead to an
increased capability to a priori determine concrete translation processes,
since it is assumed that such processes are, by their nature, complex and
unpredictable. Consequently, if a researcher aims to understand the out-
comes of translation processes, the preferred research strategy within this
domain is, for the most part, to map each process in detail. This is also
why most empirical translation studies within this domain are—according
to Ansari et al. (2010)—characterized by “methodological particularism”
meaning that each study usually deals with only one or two cases.

By comparison, the process studies paint a picture of organizational trans-
lations that run contrary to any notions of straightforward and simple
processes. Translation processes are often very time-consuming; they may
stretch out over years (Erlingsdottir and Lindberg, 2005; Larsson, 2019). They
seldom follow a one-way track from a source version to a target and sta-
bilized version. More often, the movement is circular: back, forward, and
then back again (Czarniawska and Joerges, 1996; Jensen et al., 2009). The
involved actors are almost never depicted as neutral professional translators,
but rather as people with interests and various power bases (Demir and Fjell-
strom, 2012), and the translations often take place in contexts of power plays,
conflicts, and bargaining (Morris and Landcaster, 2006; Ciuk and James,

2015).

:
|
i
{
i

ee S A) Sat PG FJ TET NE Be le we

— men Mien å ed NE

år las, Foran Gobel DE SE DEE Ds bd Sn Bn nn KEENE ee TN Or PE PETE VE PG EN må Bde’ Oe re eee pie VE km FN OD PE NE AE NE

Contextualization orientation

EEE be GAL Biram ee ee ee eet ent oe

The final two salient features of this domain are highly interrelated, but
should be analytically separated as two features. The first of these, contextual-
ization orientation, refers to an (im)balance within this domain of attention
and research efforts in favor of the target context compared to the source
context (Røvik, 2016). Although Czarniawska and Joerges’ (1996) initially
formulated the subject of organizational translation as encompassing both
decontextualization (the disembedding of a practice from a source in the
form of a representation of the practice) and contextualization (the process
of embedding an idea in a target context), the translation to and embedding
aspect has clearly dominated most subsequent empirical studies (Sahlin and
Wedlin, 2008; Van Veen et al., 2011: Kirkpatrick et al., 2013; Scheuer, 2021).

ARAD ale. sd Be rns Os sa på sie 2


The main research agenda in these works has been to study what happens
when circulating ideas are translated into certain national and organizational
contexts (Boutaiba and Strandgaard Pedersen, 2003: Saka, 2004: Erlingsdottir
and Lindberg, 2005; Bergström, 2007; Glover and Wilkinson, 2007 - Frenkel,
3008; Kantola and Seeck, 2011; Mueller and Whittle, 2011; Gond and Box-
enbaum, 2013; Ciuk and James, 2015; Nielsen et al., 2020; 2022). Few studies
framed within the organizational translation perspective have focused explic-
itly on the decontextualization phase. Those that have done so include Røvik
(2007), Nielsen et al. (2022), and Westney and Pikkari (2020).

Interestingly, the target and contextualization orientation within the
domain of organizational translation clearly corresponds to a central feature
within the domain of translation studies, and was especially present and con-
spicuous after the cultural turn of the 1980s. Within translation studies, the
corresponding strong adherence to the target context comes to expression in
works from the manipulation school and the Skopos theory.

Translation as transformation

The fifth salient feature of organizational translation is expressed in the
widely acknowledged axiom among researchers within this domain that to
translate is, by definition, to transform. This is a strong carry-over from
the sociology of translation and actor network theory. For example, Serre
(1974/1982) postulated that translation is not merely linguistics and that
it takes many different forms. However, he emphasized, it always involves
transformation: Each act of translation changes both the translator and what

‘s translated. This axiom is restated in most of the defining works of organiza-
tional translation, such as Czarniawska and Joerges (1996), Czarniawska and

Sevön (1996; 2005), and Sahlin-Andersson (1996).
There are three main reasons why translation scholars within this domain

tend to equate translation with transformation. First, while most physical
objects can be exactly copied quite easily, it is much harder (probably impos-
sible) to copy circulating 'mmaterial ideas. Second, unlike physical objects,
circulating ideas are often very transformable. Even ideas packed as ‘evi-
denced practices” often allow room for alternative interpretations and, thus,
for variations and heterogeneity (Røvik, 2019). Third, even if one succeeds in
copying a practice and/or an idea from one to another organizational unit, it
may lead to transformations, because ‘the act to set something in a new place

is to construct it anew” (Czarniawska and Sevon, 2005: 8),

The axiom that translation of practices and ideas always means transforma-
anizational context is probably a reason why researchers

tion of the target org

————=—==————=-— === 9 ii. sp


98 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

are not, on average, as concerned with the source

context and the decontextualization phase as they are with the contextualiza.
tion phase. This is because the theoretically predicted transformative effects

of translations will mainly come to expression, and can therefore be studied

in the contextualization phase in the target organization( S).
In a review of 150 central publications framed within the organizational

translation theory van Grinsven et al. (2016) focused on how various authors
conceive of (1) the source of transformations and why translations lead to
variations, and (2) the object of transformation (what iS transformed), The
review revealed two main answers to the question of why ideas are trans.
formed when they are translated. The first is variations stemming from
embeddedness. Ideas are transformed due to the power of contexts, which ig
expressed among translators in more OI less unconscious efforts to interpret
and adapt circulating ideas to make them fit into their target local contexts
(Kirkpatrick et al., 2013). The second is variation stemming from Strategiz-
ing. Circulating ideas are sometimes strategically interpreted and translated
into specific versions as a means of improving goal achievement (Lervik and
Lunnan, 2004; Boxenbaum and Strandgaard Pedersen, 2009). The literature
review also revealed two main approaches to questions about the object of
variation. The first is representational—or ideational variation. Here, trans-
lation means the shaping and reshaping of the language packing and the
symbolic meaning of the circulating ideas (Zilber, 2006; Gond and Boxen-
baum, 2013). The second approach is structural variation. Studies in this
group highlight how translations can lead to transformations, and thus to
variations, in structures, procedures, routines, and practices (Ansari et al,

2010).

working within this domain

Summary: A generic structure for a translation theory |
of knowledge transfer |

Ihis chapter has laid the groundwork for the development of a trans-
lation theory of knowledge transfer. Building on Cornelissen's (2005)
domain-interaction model, a generic structure for the translation theory
= been worked out. The content of this structure is summarized as
ollows:

Two external domains (translation studies and organizational translations) are

chosen to serve as input spaces from which analogies and metaphors can be
borrowed as “raw materials” for the theory.


Antecedents of a Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 99

The first pa outlining a generic structure was to work out an abstracted
skeleton model, which contains elements that are common to and unify the

two external domains and the target domain of knowledge transfer across
organizational borders. The four main elements of the skeleton model are
features of the source entity, of the transfer process, barriers, and the recipient
units.

The generic structure also builds on Ortony’s (1979a; 1979b) theory of
saliency imbalance in metaphors as a strategy to generate novel theories
about a target domain. In light of features that are salient to an external
source domain, one can discover aspects of the target domain that were
previously unnoticed and can provide the basis for new concepts and the-
ories. In line with Ortony’s theory, six salient features of the translation
studies—domain and five such features of the domain of organizational
translation—have been identified and described. Together, these features and
arguments provide the generic structure for a translation theory of knowl-
edge transfer. The next chapter introduces (expressed with a central term
from the domain-interaction model) “the blending phase,’ where insights
from the two external domains will be juxtaposed with insights from the

target domain of knowledge transfer.

Figure 3.2 Summing up: Salient features of two source domains
NN

The domain of translation studies: Six salient features

1. Decontextualization and contextualization
Translation contains two intertwined processes: decontextualization, which is

disembedding the text from the source context while preserving its meaning; and
contextualization, which is bringing across the text and make it comprehensible

in the target context while preserving its source context meaning.

2. Norms of translation
Includes questions about the overall purpose of translations and about the

yardsticks for evaluating the quality of concrete translations. There are two main
and competing norms. One is adherence to the source text and context (as in
literal translation, for example). The other Is adherence to the target context

(adapting the text to fit into the target context).

3. Rules of translation
Translation is a rule-based professional activity. Transla

principles that serve as guidelines for translation practices.

4. Barriers to translation
A translation barrier is a factor that has the potential to impede and/or distort

the translated target version of a source text. Barriers may stem from

tion rules are established


,
100 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfe

from cultural differences, or from power

| nøuage differences,
considerable languag urce and target contexts.

and/or ideological imbalances between SO
5. Thetranslator |
One of the world's most institutionali

includes the language code-switcher, t
d the decision-maker.

zed roles. Arepertoire of translator roles
he creative artist, the intercultural

communicator, an

6. Translation competence å had
There are prevailing discourses within the domain about what knowledge ang

expertise should characterize a competent translator. Four main types of such

competence are frequently debated: (a) bilingualism, (b) biculturalism, (c) the
consciousness and knowledge of translation norms and rules, and (d) knowleg ge
about subject matter (that Is, the translator’s knowledge about the material or

subject that is being translated). During the last 60 years, translation education
and training have been academized and highly institutionalized.

The domain of organizational translation: Five salient features

1. The translation objects
The main objects of translations are various types of organizational ideas tray.

eling as quasi-objects, such as concepts, names, speech, pictures, websites, anq

manuals.

2. Images of the translator
The image of the translator in organizational translation differs from correspond-

ing images in translation studies in two important respects. First, the translator is
not a recognized, explicit and professionalized role, but an aspect of a role, depict-
ing the enactment of circulating ideas that some actors do while performing other
roles. Second, while language translation is performed by one translator, many
and different kinds of actors are involved in translation of organizational ideas.

3. Process orientation
There is astrong and persistent interest within the domain of organizational trans-

lation to study translation processes, often in the form of longitudinal one-case
studies. This reflects the domain-specific axiom that each translation process is
complex and unique in character. Outcomes of translations processes are almost
impossible to predict a priori.

4, Contextualization orientation
There is a prevailing imbalance within this domain regarding attention and
research efforts in favor of target context and the embedding processes, and, cor-

respondingly, less attention towards the source context and the disembedding
Processes,


Antecedents of a Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer 101

5. Translation as transformation

A strong axiomatic feature within this domain is the notion that translation always

involves transformation of the translation object (for example, a circulating idea),
as well as transformation of the target context.


PART III
THE THEORY


4

reframing Knowledge Transfer as Acts
of Translations

introduction

The core of the translation theory that will be outlined in this and the two

subsequent chapters is expressed in three propositions. (1) Knowledge trans-
for between organizational sources and recipients can be conceptualized and
understood as acts of translations. (2) Translation of knowledge (practices
and ideas) across organizational borders is a rule-based activity. (3) Trans-
lations make a difference; the way translations are performed may explain
outcomes of knowledge transfer processes.

This chapter focuses on the first of these propositions and offers a broad
reinterpretation of knowledge transfer between organizations in light of the
salient features of the two external domains (translation studies and organiza-
tional translations). While Chapter 3 represented the first step in the blending
process (extracting and describing the external domains’ salient features),
this chapter takes the blending process further into the next phase, where
:deas derived from the salient features are juxtaposed with insights about the
target domain of knowledge transfer between organizational units. However,
with Cornelissens (2005) arguments in mind, it is important to note that I
do not just decipher any correspondence highlighted throughout the chapter
between the salient features of the external domains and the phenomenon of
knowledge transfer across organizational borders, but actively construct it.
This means that the construct—the theory—emerges from complex cogni-
tive processes of juxtaposing, followed by blending of elements from all three
input spaces (the two external domains and the target domain of organiza-
tional knowledge transfer). Inherent in such an approach is the potential to
gain “revelatory insights” (Corley and Gioia, 2011); that is, insights about
organizational knowledge transfer that go beyond ambitions of seeing more
clearly what we already know.

This chapter offers a broad interpretation of knowledge transfer between
organizational units as acts of translation. The chapter starts with a dis-
cussion about the relevance of various salient features of the two external

A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer. Kjell Arne Røvik, Oxford University Press. © Kjell Arne Røvik (2023).
DOI: 10.1093/050/9780198832362.003.0004

PS Pre ha GE [9 ft > 1c


fer
106 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfe

anding of organizational knowledge transfer

domains to improve underst | |
p t of the chapter, which conceptualizes and

This is followed by the main par
theorizes knowledge transfer between

processes: de-contextualization an

From juxtaposing to blending

o outer domains and the target domain of organiza.
nly been juxtaposed; that is, lined up side by
means place something alongside/nearby)
where elements are combined in g

So far, features of the tw
tional knowledge transfer have 0
side (from the Latin juxta, which
We now enter into the blending phase,

search for new insights. |
ing knowledge transfer across organizationa|

The process of conceptualiz | |
bilization of the entire set of salient

borders as acts of translations requires MO
some features are espe-

features from the two outer domains. However,
utlining a translation theory of knowledge transfer.

cially consequential for o
and the norms, bar-

Among these are the image of transferees as translators,
riers, and rules of translation, translation competence, and translation as

de-contextualization and contextualization.
Transferees as translators. Probably the most consequential reconceptu-

alization stimulated by a salient feature of translation studies is to image
mediating actors involved in border-crossing knowledge transfer processes as

translators. This clearly breaks with the often gently articulated and underthe-

orized notions of knowledge mediating actors as passive carriers, conveyors,
and transporters. The image of knowledge mediators as translators paves the
way for reinterpretation of their roles. The role of a “translator” is richer

and potentially more important than that of a transporter. For example, in
light of insights from the domain of translation studies, a translator can be

conceived of as a communicator who actively mediates between various orga-

nizational and institutional contexts. In contrast to the passive carrier, the

translator role also entails the image of the active decision maker who must
make important decisions under varies degrees of uncertainty, such as how to
obtain more detailed information about the knowledge and technology base
that a desired practice in a source organization is founded on, and how to
implementa version of it that is adapted to a target organization, while simul-
taneously avoiding important aspects of the desired practice being lost in
translation. Thus, the image of the knowledge mediator as a translator makes
it possible to see the involved actors acting in various roles, spanning from
code-switchers, whose ambitions are restricted to copying and reproduction,

abt UNDE ty tile DESL CS

— ne at

Reframi
ING Knowledge Transfer as Acts of Translations 107

-reative artists, wl |
to creati ype , Who do not feel especially committed to the source practice
version and are more concerned with inventing something new

From a domain of organizational translation come two other ideas that
advance the ae of the mediators in knowledge transfers as
translators. Lhe first concerns the number of actors involved as translators

in such processes. As a rule, only one translator performs translations of
texts pr languages. However, knowledge transfer processes across orga-
nizational borders usually involve many mediators acting as translators. For
example, there can be source-based actors who translate practices to rep-
resentations of practices, and target-based actors who translate images of
source practices to target practices. In addition, knowledge transfers often
involve externally located translators, such as consultants (Sturdy et al., 2009),
national public authorities (Røvik, 2007), and headquarters of multinational
corporations (Kern et al., 2019). The second idea from the domain of organi-
zational translation is that individuals performing in ordinary roles, such as
leaders, middle managers, consultants, and experts, usually conduct acts of
translations in knowledge transfers (Radaelli and Sitton-Kent, 2016). Thus,
knowledge translation acts are usually performed as aspects of other roles.
Norms of knowledge translation. The reconceptualization of knowledge
mediators as translators is a fundamental and consequential one that helps us
clearly see the relevance and necessity of other salient features from the two
outer domains to construct a more complete image of knowledge transfer as
translation. One such salient feature that becomes relevant is norms of trans-
lation, a concept that refers to the purpose(s) of translations and the standards
for evaluating the quality of any translation. In light of this salient feature,
we zoom in on the overall norms and notions within the field of knowl-
edge transfer about good and acceptable translations versus less good and less
acceptable translations across organizational borders. Among the numerous

norms in this field, two competing ones largely influence knowledge trans-

tices. The first is the norm of adherence to the source organization

fer prac
the target context; that is, to

context. The second is adequacy in relation to
provide translated target versions of the source practice that are adapted to

the needs of the target organization. Thus, the former is a translation norm

of adequacy (adherence to the source), while the latter is a norm of relevance

(adherence to the target). As will be shown and discussed in the remaining
ace and time (Westney, 1987; Westney and

ble patterns of knowledge

chapters, such norms vary in sp
Piekkari, 2020). They influence and lead to discerni

translation processes.
Barriers in organizational k

barriers is a third salient feat

nowledge transfers. The notion of translation
ure from the external domain of translation


108 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

, reconceptualizing knowledge transfer ag acts
“barriers” includes all factors that complicate
arriers can delay, halt, and sometimes even
They can also lead to distortions and some.

times also to destructions; for example, in the mr that the mportant SECretg
of a desired source practice are lost in translation. Translation barriers Can
be of various kinds. Perhaps the best-known hindrance occurs when Source
organizations act to protect the knowledge base of their successful practice.
from outsiders’ access (Baughn et al., 1997). Barriers also stem from varioyg
kinds of differences, distances—o0I imbalances—between source and target
organizational contexts, such as between nations (institutional arrangements,
languages, public regulations, etc.), cultures, types of organizations, tech.
nologies, etc. Knowledge transfer scholars have identified and thoroughly
studied transfer barriers (Szulanski 1996; 2003; Sun and Scott, 2005; Paulin
and Suneson, 2015). However, most of these studies have been carried oy;
on samples of knowledge transfers at aggregated levels, and to lesser extent
focusing on the processes in which involved mediators strive and cope with

the challenges of translating knowledge across various transfer barriers, Thus.
the focus on how translators relate to and handle knowledge barriers makes

it necessary to include insights from the salient feature of process orientation
from the domain of organizational translation. Knowledge transfer processes

often stretch over long periods and may involve many individuals who par-
ticipate in different phases and at different places throughout the processes.
Thus, in order to understand and theorize about the translators and how

they de-contextualize desired practices and contextualize representations of

practices, it is necessary to zoom in on such translation processes.
Rules of knowledge translation. A central salient feature of the domain of

translation studies is rules of translation. There are a multitude of rules regu-
lating linguistic translations. Correspondingly, in light of this salient feature,
one can acknowledge and conceptualize that translation of practices and
knowledge across organizational borders are rule-based and therefore pat-
terned behavior. Chapter 5 highlights this part of the translation theory of
knowledge transfer.

Translation competence in knowledge transfers. The focus on translation
rules and on translators’ handling of knowledge barriers also makes insights
from the salient feature of translation competence (from the domain of
translation studies) highly relevant in a translation theory. In translation
studies, such competence refers to bilingualism, biculturalism, knowledge of
translation norms and rules, and knowledge about the subject matter. The
reconceptualization of the mediators as active translators—whose actions

studies that is highly relevant it
of translations. The concept of
knowledge transfer processes. B
terminate translation processes.

oh 6 mms Gat ÅR fre gs galt: , AD) «tm Aba EE JE i as Å Då 4 VM id

fe ir Oe TE


Reframi
ng Knowledge Transfer as Acts of Translations 109

‘emaini | |
The remaining and main part of this Chapter is a reinterpretation of

organizational knowledge transfer in light of the salient feature of de-
contextualization and contextualization.

Two key translation processes: De-contextualization
and contextualization

The notion of de-contextualization and contextualization is a preeminent and
defining feature of the domain of translation studies. It is a cornerstone in this
chapter's attempt to reframing knowledge transfer as acts of translation. In
language translation, the concepts of de-contextualization/contextualization
points towards texts embedded in contexts. Thus, to translate requires that the
translator, when dis-embedding, consciously makes explicit and preserves
the often-implicit meaning that the context adds to the text and then makes it
comprehensible in the target language and its context. Transfer of knowledge
across organizational borders entails challenges that are similar, although not
identical. The remainder of this chapter is organized according to these two

key processes.

De-contextualization

In the context of knowledge transfers, de-contextualization refers to trans-
lating an identified organizational practice in an organization and its appur-
tenant knowledge base into an abstract representation (images, words, texts,
pictures, etc.). The concept of “practice” is often associated with various kinds
of observable actions (such as workers making movements, using technolo-

etc.) rather than with thoughts and ideas. The concept of practice in this
outinized execution of specific orga-

e the action aspect of a desired practice can often be
much harder to identify

e it is based on. The knowl-
s involved in the execution of a practice can

gies,
book refers to knowledge-based and r

nizational tasks. Whil
observed while it is carried out, it is, by definition,

and conceptualize the fine-grained knowledg
edge represented among actor


110 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

it includes knowledge about the type ©

tion of a practice; the types of products an = dice man
produces; and types of stakeholders, markets, cus : mers, com.

petitors, etc. Declarative knowledge is often ver balized and relatively easy to
| knowledge, that is, knowledge

communicate. The second type IS procedura |

about how to accomplish a task—insights into what actions are appropriate

to take in which sequence to achieve defined goals, etc. (Georgeff and Lan.

sky, 1986). While declarative knowledge is knowledge about concepts and

facts, procedural knowledge is skills to perform certain tasks. The third type
fers to involved actors’ knowledge aboyt

is conditional knowledge, which re |
d practice is established on, and how

the cause-and-effect chains that a desire
and to what extent such cause-and-effect chains may work or not work under

various conditions. Thus, it entails knowledge about why and when; that is,
under which conditions the cause-and-effect chains work as desired, planned,

and required to achieve goals, as well as knowledge about which conditions
are likely to lead to distortions or breaks in the cause-and-effect chains (Antal,

2000).
These three types of knowledge can be summarized as knowing what

(declarative), knowing how to (procedural), and knowing why and when

(conditional). However, although analytically separated, the borders between
these knowledge types are blurred. Involved actors usually apply and syn-

thesize all types of knowledge when engaging in the execution of various

practices.

Translatability

One of the main challenges when translating a desired practice in a source
organization context is ensuring that all of the relevant aspects for how and

why the practice works in the source context are identified and expressed in

the obtained representations of it (such as images, texts, pictures). This crit-
ical phase accounts for many variations in the transfer of knowledge across

organizational borders. The challenges of de-contextualization can be con-
ceptualized in terms of the translatability of a desired source practice; that
is, the extent to which a particular practice in an organizational context can
be translated to an abstract representation without excluding the elements

required for how it functions in the source context.
Based on synthesized insights from the domain of Translations studies

and the target domain of Organizational knowledge transfers, three variables


Reframi
raming Knowledge Transfer as Acts of Translations 111

stand out as decisive for the translatability of a practice; the practice's com-
plexity, embeddedness, and explicitness.

Complexity
The translated of an organizational practice depends partly on its com-
plexity. Iwo intertwined aspects constitute the antecedent of complexity, the

human-technology factor, and the causal ambiguity factor.

The human-technology factor. This factor refers to the number of individ-
uals involved in the accomplishment of a practice, and to the relationship
between the involved actors and the technology in use. Based on literature
reviews, it is reasonable to outline two general propositions.

The first suggests a connection between the number of individuals involved
in the performance of a practice, the degree of required coordination between
them, and the translatability of the practice—expressed as follows in propo-

sitional form:

Proposition 4.1. The higher the number of individuals involved in the accomplish-
ment of a practice, and the more the accomplishment is dependent upon tight
mutual coordinated actions among those involved, the more the translatability of

the practice decreases.

The proposed connections can be illustrated with examples from football.
A first-class football team competing against another team on a field is the
ultimate expression of complex interaction among a group of skilled individ-
uals. What an excited watching audience can observe is the teams structure
and the players’ moves when defending and attacking the other team. How-
ever, what the audience cannot observe, and therefore cannot have firm
knowledge about, is the continuous flows of decisions that all the players
throughout the match are involved in; for example, how to move and act
appropriately in relation to how they anticipate that their teammates will
move and act, based on experience and intuition. An important part of

the players’ competence entails knowledge about their teammates and who,
have the skills to handle which situations, which is a version of

1993; Hollingshead, 1998), or “transactive memory” (Wegner et al., 1991).
It is very difficult to model such a complex practice performed by a rather
large group of individuals; in other words, it is difficult to translate it to a

high-fidelity representation of what happened and why it happened. Thus,
it is hard to recreate such a practice in other contexts. This highlights the

general insight that practices that depend on complex interaction among

— ss — ae 45 —- aa ee > — eee =-
pp stv
— ED SED sg


112 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

obably the most difficult to transfer (Argote and

‘ous individuals are pr
numerous individua p orzillo, 2008; Tallman and

Ingram, 2000; Berta and Baker, 2004; Probst and B

Chacar, 2011).
The second proposition suggests å
base of a practice and its translatabilit

relationship between the technological
y—expressed as follows:

Proposition 4.2. The more the accomplishment of a prac tice is based on a technology

with a clear-cut application, and the less it involves human individuals, the more the

practice’s translatability increases.

Although such mainly technology-based practices—when transferred to
other organizations—often need to be adapted to fit into the new contexts

(Leonard-Barton and Deschamps, 1988; Douthwaite et al., 2001; Cascio and
Montealegre, 2016), the translatability of such practices is often relatively
high, meaning that it is, on average, relatively easy for translators to make
high-fidelity representations of technology-driven practices. This reflects the

fact that technology is often shaped as physical objects. Thus, although they
are often very complex, they can be observed, and their modus operandi

can be unveiled, understood, and replicated relatively easily. Some studies
support these suggestions. Zander and Kogut (1995) found that knowledge
that was clearly associated with the operation of certain technologies was
more easily codified and transferred more rapidly than knowledge dissoci-
ated from technologies. Mansfield (1985) studied the speed at which various

kinds of knowledge leaked out from innovating firms to competitor organi-
zations. The study, which encompassed 100 American firms with innovating

technology, showed that information about the technologies spread rapidly
to rivals—and much faster than knowledge about organizational work pro-
cesses and routines that were only weakly related to technology. Detailed
information about the technology involved in various work processes was
in the hands of rivals within a year, on average. Such findings contribute
to my main argument about the relatively high translatability of technology,
compared, for example, to knowledge about human skills and interpersonal
relationships involved in the accomplishment of certain practices.

The causal ambiguity factor. The second antecedent of complexity is causal
ambiguity. Attempts to transfer knowledge are often motivated by obser-
vations of good or superior results in certain organizations. However, the
linkages between the observed results and the underlying factors that have
generated the results are often unclear and ambiguous. It can be difficult to
identify all the factors that contribute to the results, let alone how these factors
intertwine, and thus difficult to define the relative importance of each factor.

In their seminal paper, Lippman and Rumelt (1982) coined the concept of

EDEN


Reframi
framing Knowledge Transfer as Acts of Translations 113

causal pm Ag å basic, irreducible ambiguity concerning the
nature O oa connections between actions and results” (Lippman and
Rumelt :418). The concepts relate to “ambiguity as to how organizational
actions an results, inputs and outcomes, or competencies and advantage
are linked (Konlechner and Ambrosini, 2019: 2352). The literature on the
subject identifies various degrees of causal ambiguity—and points at possi-
ble consequences for knowledge transfer. Total, or basic causal ambiguity,
characterizes situations in which the linkage between causes and results are
fundamentally ambiguous, meaning that it could not be reduced to certainty
even with great effort. According to Lippman and Rumelt (1982), uncertainty
about such linkages is basically ambiguous in cases “where the factors respon-
sible for performance differentials will resist precise identification” (p. 418).
In such situations, actors in the organization’s environment or within the
organization do not possess the full knowledge of why a practice works as
it does (Barney, 1991; Kaul, 2013).

However, uncertainty about the cause-and-effect linkages that underlie a
desired practice is not always of the total causal ambiguity type. This means
that uncertainty in such cases can be reduced (Mosakowski, 1997; Ambrosini
and Bowman, 2005). It also means that superior knowledge of a practices
cause-and-effect relations is often unequally distributed among actors. ‘The
most typical asymmetric distribution is instances where actors within an
organization have superior knowledge of a practices cause-and-effect link-
ages, while actors located outside the organization may experience causal
ambiguity regarding the same linkages. Such asymmetric distribution of
knowledge of cause and effects is proclaimed to be a main barrier to imita-
tion by outside located actors (Peteraf, 1993; Kim, 2013) and, consequently, a
powerful source of competitive advantage (McEvily and Chakravarthy, 2002;
Lawson et al., 2012; Bouncken, 2015). Studies have shown that competitors

react to high levels of causal ambiguity in different ways, for example, by
either toning down (Strang and Still, 2006) or intensifying their imitation

efforts (Ordanini et al., 2008). They may also try to compensate for the causal

ambiguity that characterizes the basis for another organizations competitive
ubstitution, which means developing new knowl-

advantage by competence s
1993; McEvily

edge, and/or new substituting products (Dosi and Marengo,

et al., 2000).

While causal ambiguity
is a main source of distortions to knowledge trans
borders (Fang et al., 2013; Konlechner and Ambrosini, 2019). Lin (2003)
es in 86 organizations in Taiwan that transferred

d in foreign countries. He found that

frequently leads to competitive advantage, it also
fer across organizational

studied learning process
technologies from organizations locate


114 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

g how the technology worked in the donor orga.
he transfer process and left its marks on the
menting and routinizing the usage of the tech.
tions—in the sense that learning problem,
creased with increasing causal ambiguity,
| ambiguity and translatability can be

causal ambiguity regardin
nizations propagated from ¢
subsequent processes of imple
nologies in the recipient organiza
and implementation failure rates in

The relationship between causa
expressed in the following proposition:

3. Causal ambiguity of a source practice influences the practice’s trans-

Proposition 4. |
ges between input factors and results,

latability, in that the more ambiguous the linka
the harder it is to translate the practice to a representation that accounts for all the

essentials for how it works in the source organization.

Embeddedness |
Embeddedness is the second key variable that determines a practice's trans-

latability. The concept of embeddedness is attributed to the economic his-
torian Karl Polanyi, who developed it in his 1944 book entitled The Great

Transformation (Polanyi, 1944) to catch what he argued was a typical fea-
ture of nonmarket societies. In contrast to modern market-based societies,
economic exchanges among actors in nonmarket societies (such as peasant

societies) are based on principles of reciprocity and redistribution embed-

ded in social relationships and kinships (Block, 2003). In the 1970s, economic
sociologist Mark Granovetter (1973; 1985) revitalized and developed the con-

cept further. He argued against Polanyi’s view that the logics of economics
in modern market-based societies differed fundamentally from the social

relationships-based economic exchanges in nonmarket societies. Granovet-
ter's main argument was that even economic actors and their transactions are

severely influenced—although not slavishly determined—by ties embedded

in social networks. In addition to complexity, the translatability of a practice
also depends on embeddedness; that is, the extent to which the knowledge

that constitute a desired practice is anchored in the source organization's
intra and/or interorganizational contexts. Two important aspects of the links
between translatability and embeddedness need to be clarified. The first is a
question about where, and the second about how.

The where question concerns the locus; that is, where and in which contexts
are the knowledge embedded? Knowledge is sometimes highly concentrated,
such as when almost all the necessary skills and knowledge for performing
a desired practice are located within one organization or department (Foss
and Pedersen, 2001), or within geographically concentrated clusters (Isak-
sen, 2009; Langen, 2002). On other occasions, and increasingly commonly,

—


Reframin
B Knowledge Transfer as Acts of Translations 115

she knowledge is spatially dispersed in vari
: | OUS and oft
jetworks that crisscross organizational and ai ir re
1996; Bresman et al., 2010; Fahy et al., 2014) orders (Powell et al.
The degree of concentration or dispersion of a desired practice’s knowledge

base has consequences for the translatabili
; itv of ;
the following proposition: y of the practice, as expressed in

ition 4.4.
Propositio sis An ji the knowledge base of a practice is spatially concentrated,
the easier it is to identify and translate to a high-fidelity representation

On the other hand, dispersed knowledge bases embedded in loosely con-
nected interorganizational networks deployed at different places present
translators with the challenge of how to identify and demarcate the exact
knowledge base of a desired practice (Mosakowski, 1997; Hong and Nguyen,
3909; Erkelens et al., 2015). Such a condition has consequences for the
translatability of the practice, in propositional form:

Proposition 4.5. The more the knowledge base of a desired practice is dispersed and
embedded in interorganizational networks at different places, the more challenging
itis to demarcate and the harder it is to translate to a high-fidelity representation.

The how question concerns the type and strength/weakness of the anchor-
ing of the knowledge to the various “beds” in which it is embedded. The

concept of “embeddedness” differs from other conceptualizations of how

knowledge is deployed in organizations (such as “repositories” and “reser-
voirs”) because it signals that knowledge can be ingrained in, "take root,

and be tied to its “beds” A corresponding, almost synonymous concept is

“tuated knowledge,’ which is coined and applied within the community of
adition (Lave and Wenger, 1991; Brown and Duguid,

h and Argote (2001), knowledge can be embed-
ons: in individuals (both members

hnologies and tools, in tasks, and

the practice-research tr
2001). According to McGrat
ded in four basic elements of organizati

and nonmembers), in various types of tec

in various subnetworks that connect the elements.
The translator, whose task here is to make a high-fidelity representation

of the embedded knowledge, faces the challenge of dis-embedding, which is

separating the embedded knowledge from its various “beds.” This can some-

times be challenging because the knowledge and the “beds” —such as tools,
individuals, tasks, and social networks—are so ‘ntertwined that they stand

out as almost inseparable, as in cases of intertwining of a certain adapted

tool and the human skills neede

d to operate it. For example, Moreland et al.


eory of Knowledge Tra nsfer

(1996) studied an attempt to move Å network of member ask relations (calle d
| y system (TMS) network) from the group where it w å
her members. The researchers explaineg

a transactive memot nee
| ith o
developed to another group Wl
p f how to make the TMS system work was a

knowledge 0
renne å a malt of the original group, attempts ” replace these
members with other ‘ndividuals caused the failure. Thus, highly embed deg
| in nature. However, knowledge can also he
d, as in cases where the knowledge nec.
s is condensed in written instruction.

116 A Translation Th

moderately and even loosely embedde:
essary for operating certain technologie

and manuals (Lillrank, 1995). En
zed i propositional form:

Proposition 4.6. The more a desired practice's knowledge base is embedded in orga-

hnologies, tasks, individuals, and social relations,

nizational elements, such as tec
the harder it is to dis-embed and translate toa high-fidelity representation.

Explicitness
Knowledge among the source-based actors about a desired practice can be

explicit or tacit (Polanyi, 1958; 1962; 1967). Explicit knowledge is codj-
fied, verbalized, well-articulated (Nonaka and Takeuchi, 1995; Li and Gao,

2003) and easily taught, written, and expressed; for example, in formulas
and manuals (Bejan and Kraus, 2003; Martin and Salomon 2003). The con-

cept of "proximal”—or tacit knowledge, as theorized by Michael Polanyi
(1958), refers to the nonverbalized, noncodified and nonstandardized knowl-

edge that underlies a skillful performance. Tacit knowledge cannot be easily
talked about and taught to newcomers, nor transformed to manuals and

explicit procedures. There are two main reasons why the whole or parts of
the knowledge base of a desired practice can remain tacit. The first is that

tacit knowledge is usually developed through practical experience where
actors learn skills, not through language lessons, but by observation, imita-
tion, and trial-and-error processes (Nonaka et al. 1994). Such knowledge can
be hard to codify and verbalize, both for outsiders and even for the involved
practitioners (Howells, 1996). According to Spender (1993), “effortless-ness”
is a key feature of tacit knowledge, meaning that practitioners who use it
are often unaware of the knowledge being applied. Thus, tacit knowledge is
often “incommunicable” (Polanyi, 1962). However, there is also another rea-
son why tacit knowledge is not made explicit. Keeping tacit knowledge tacit
and protected from being accessed by outsiders is often part of a strategy to
secure competitive advantage (McAuly et al., 1997; Berman et al., 2002). This
reflects the fact that tacit knowledge is often conceived of as the most valuable


Reframing K
g Knowledge Transfer as Acts of Translations 117

ab |
k | nsiper, 1998; Hadjimichael

explicit-tacit variable h

oo ction The more ex na Consequences for the translatability of a
desired P | plicit the knowledge, the easier it i
into an Even more codified and transferable representation. I due re
of tacit knowledge, the source language is someho ra n the 7 ——
hat the translator must conduct a two-step staid mad ae it
edge must be verbalized in order to be ren then pr er
-ontext-specific knowledge must be translated to a moi esse oa
ferable representation. This increases the chances of vri aid
that å mismatch may arise between the tacit knowledge and its translated
abstract representation. There have been debates within translation studies
about how to express explicitly in the translated target text version what is
implicit in the source text (Blum-Kulka, 1986). This is referred to as “explici-
‘ation, which means making explicit in the target version something that was
implied or understood through presupposition in the source version (@veras,
1998; Abdrashitova et al., 2018). This is a challenging task for the transla-
tor, because making the tacit explicit involves increased risks of translation
failures, and calls not only for bilingual competence, but also for bicultural

competence.
The connections between explicitness/tacitness and translatability can be

expressed as follows:

Proposition 4.7. The more explicit (codified and verbalized) a desired source prac-

the higher its translatability. Correspondingly: the less explicit the knowledge
translatability—and the higher the chances

f the practice in the

tice IS,
base of a desired practice, the lower its
for loosing of elements that are essential for the functioning o

source organization.

es can be analyzed as combinations and variations of

In principle, all practic
latability. Consider the two following

the three variables that determine trans

examples:

The case of Airline cabin crews |
e cabin crew and the flight crew (pilots).

A passenger aircraft has two crews: th
nslatability of the

d security tasks,

cabin crew's practices. Such a

Here we investigate the tra |
usually consists of four to five

crew, which handles service an


118 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

o eight people on longer, overseas flights, The
he human-technology factor and the Causa]

ambiguity factor. Regarding the first factor, the service work of cabin crew.
towards the passengers is carried out with modest use of technology (kitchen

heater, credit card machines, etc.). However, an airplane is a coherent tech-
nological system with a certain modus operandi, which largely defines ang
determines the roles and tasks of each cabin crew member. For example,
the knowledge and drilled skills that cabin crew members possess about
on-board security are mostly related to the airplane as a technological system,

One might think that carrying out a practice, which involves up to eight
members of a crew team, is complex because it presupposes tight and coor-

dinated actions among the members (cf. proposition 4.1). However, this ig
not the case here because the roles and tasks of each individual member are

described and defined so clearly and in detail that the accomplishment of
each individual’s tasks is only modestly dependent upon mutual coordinated

actions with other crew members.
Due to highly routine- and experience-based work operation, the cabin

crew members’ practices involve modest levels of causal ambiguity (lack of
knowledge about how actions and outcomes are linked). However, the airline
industry is an international business, and research has shown that that pas-

sengers expectations of airliners’ service types and levels vary significantly
between different ethnic groups/nationalities (Gilbert and Wong, 2003. In

addition, studies have revealed gaps between the services provided by the
cabin crew and passengers expectations, and further, that such gaps vary
with passengers’ ethnic and/or national background (Parasuraman et al,
1993; Sultan and Simpson, 2000). This increases the pressure on cabin crew
members to reduce standardization, be able to identify various passenger
groups different service expectations, and differentiate the service provided
accordingly. It also increases chances for causal ambiguity, meaning that
the links between the services provided and passengers’ level of satisfaction
become more ambiguous.

Cabin crews’ practices can also be assessed in light of the explicitness/tacit
variable. Although there certainly are elements of tacit knowledge involved
when cabin crew members relate to individual passengers (Sigala and Chalk-
iti, 2007), most of the knowledge that they need to carry out their tasks are
highly verbalized and explicit. Each crew member has their own Cabin Crew
Operation Manual (about 450-500 pages), which describe in detail all kinds
of tasks that should be done and situations that may occur during a flight, and
how the crew member should handle them. This means that the practice of
each cabin member has been de-contextualized and expressed in a detailed

people on short flights and up t
two features of complexity are t

RE NE GE SS ee ee ee


Reframi
ming Knowledge Transfer as Acts of Translations 119

representation. Each pain member is also obliged to report explicitly—
written and/ or orally—all kinds of irregularities they may have observed on a
flight. In addition, crew members usually have a tablet on which, before each

flight, they are provided with written flight-specific information (weather,
umber and types of passengers, etc.),

The key variable “embeddedness” concerns questions about where the
knowledge to be used is located (concentrated or dispersed), and about how
difficult/easy it is to release the Knowledge from its “beds” The knowledge
that cabin crews use when they practice is only modestly embedded. Most of
the knowledge they need is located in the operation manual. This knowledge
is also very available in downloaded versions on each crew members’ tablet.
The members are trained and requested always to have their tablet available
and to use It.

Comparatively, the knowledge base of cabin crew members comes out as
high on explicitness, low on embeddedness, and rather low on complexity.
This indicates that the translatability of this practice is rather high, mean-
ing that the knowledge needed can be quite easily translated to high-fidelity
representations without crucial information being lost in translation. For
example, the translatability and replicability of this practice come to expres-
sion in the high rotation of individuals in cabin teams. It is common for a
new crew member to join a cabin crew team almost every day—indicating
that the knowledge needed to do the work is not embedded in the relations
between particular individuals. A trained cabin crew member can also easily
change employer and switch from one airline to another.

The case of stockfish production
The second example is related to the production of stockfish—and espe-

cially to the practices of the stockfish quality sorters. Here the translatability
is quite different from the cabin crews practices. Stockfish is made from

codfish, a dark-spotted fish that is widespread in the North Atlantic and usu-

ally caught at about 25 pounds (11-12 kilos). Each year, in December/early
January the cod swim from the Barents Sea, down the coast of Northern Nor-

way and end up in the sea surrounding the Lofoten islands, an archipelago
that protrudes into the Norwegian Sea. Here the cods have their spawning
ground, The Lofoten cod fishery from late January to the middle of April has
taken place for hundreds of years. The total caught varies between approx-
imately 65,000 and 100,000 tons per year. About 18-20,000 tons are used
yearly to produce stockfish. The workers hang the cleaned fish on large drying
racks, In June, the then-dried fish have turned into stockfish and are col-
lected from the racks and stored in-house. Then, in the autumn, the sorting


120 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

I stockfish are exported. In fact, stockfish is the oldes

Norwegian export article, with a history starting Hr before the Viking ere
(Korneliussen and Panozza, 2005). Roughly half of t e yearly stockfish bro.
| n Italy (Korneliussen and Pedersen

«tj is exported to various regions |
duction is exp followed by the United Stateg

| is Nigeria,
2001). The second largest market 1s |
and Croatia. The important point is that the different markets demand dit.

ferent types of stockfish. In Italy, the largest market, there are different quality

demands in different regions (Nygard and Ingebrigtsen, 2019).
The different market demands make the knowledge and the work of the

stockfish sorter (in Norwegian, the vraker) very important. The vraker must
be knowledgeable about the quality of the stockfish and must be able to com.
bine this knowledge with thorough knowledge about the quality demand.
from each market. Thus, the main challenge for the vraker is to inspect each
stockfish and to grade and sort it according to 20 different categories, reflect.
ing the demands of the different markets (Borch and Korneliussen, 1995), The
competence and skills required to be a vraker are scarce, but also very deg.
sive for the fishing company in order to be able to satisfy the various segments
of customers, and thus, for the earnings of the fish company. Therefore, the

knowledgeable and skilled vrakers have been highly esteemed actors in each

company and in the fishing villages of the Lofoten islands.
The sorting practices’ translatability can be analyzed in terms of its com.

plexity. As to the human-technology factor, the sorting practice is done

almost without using any machines or other tools. A sorting team usually
consists of four or five people: that is, three or four assistants and the vraker

The assistants bring the stockfish to the well-lit sorter's table and then use
a sharp tool to cut and open up the neck of the fish so that the vraker can

inspect it, even its insides. The vraker assesses and classifies every stockfish,
It is a time-consuming work—a skilled vraker sorts 200-300 kilos per work-
ing hour. The work is carried out as mutually coordinated actions among
experienced actors and with minor use of verbal communication. As to
causal ambiguity, the involved actors in the sorter team usually possess a
firm mutual understanding of how knowledge, skills, and each member’s task
performance are linked to the quality of the outcome; that is, to the level
of sustained accuracy of the sorting process in relation to the twenty cate-
gories. Thus, the “insiders” usually do not experience causal ambiguity. For
outsiders, however (that is, those actors who are not involved in the sorting
process and do not share the insiders’ knowledge), it is almost impossible to
understand and to recreate the stockfish sorting process.

As to the explicit/tacitness variable, the practice of stockfish sorting is
mainly based on nonverbalized knowledge and skills. Some quality criteria

process starts. Almost al

mask pr FO gt,


Reframing Knowledge Transfer as Acts of Translations 121

are relatively explicit, such as the length, weight, and thickness of the stock-
fish. However, numerous other criteria and assessment techniques are much
less explicit and hard to express in precise language. Almost all of the sorter's
senses—smell, taste, and sight (assessment of the fish’ shape and color), in
addition to using the fingers to systematically touch and squeeze all parts
of the fish, must be applied in order to reach a correct decision. The best
way to learn the tacit vraking skills is by practicing for a long time in close
cooperation with a skilled vraker.
Regarding “embeddedness,” the crucial knowledge of how to practice
stockfish quality assessment is embodied in the vraker. However, it is also
embedded in å chain of fish-related actors, activities, and competencies at sea
and in each local fishing village in the Lofoten islands (Hauan, 2000). Exam-
ples include the cod fishermen operating at sea in their vessels, who are aware
of and act under the influence of quality standards for how to handle the fish
before it is hung; and "the hangmen” who—influenced by the same quality
standards—bind two and two raw fishes to each other. hang them appropri-
ately on the enormous racks, and take the dried fish down from the racks
about two months later. The practice of stockfish production is also embed-
ded in special natural conditions in the Lofoten area. At the exact time that
the steams of cod arrive at the Lofoten Sea (late January) and the spawn-
ing process takes place (January-April), the natural conditions for making
stockfish in Lofoten are probably the best in the world: the temperature at
this time of the year is seldom below the freezing point (which avoids frost
damaged fish), and mild but not hot (which prevents hung fish from rotting).
Besides, this time of the year usually provides perfect wind conditions for the
cod-drying process.

In conclusion, the practice of stockfish production and sorting involves
high complexity, low explicitness, and high embeddedness. Taken together,
it indicates that this is a practice of low translatability, meaning that it is hard
to make high-fidelity representation of, and almost impossible to dis-embed

and recreate it at places outside the Lofoten islands.

Translators and de-contextualization processes

De-contextualization processes, which means the translation of identi-

fied practices and their knowledge bases into abstract representations, can
be scrutinized in light of their whos and hows. Who are usually “the

de-contextualizers” (that is, the translators involved in processes of dis-
embedding concrete practices) and how do they do it?


e-contextualizers | |
-ontextualized by outsiders, meaning actors located out.

side and being nonmembers of the source organization where the desireg
practice is located. Among the most common external “de-contextualizery’

are large and medium-sized consulting companies (Walgenbach and Hegele
9007; Gill et al., 2020). They are key actors in

knowledge transfer industry, a global field of
d and has grown since the early 1990s (Røvik,

2007). The core of this industry is built around the concept of “best prac-
tices” and on the belief that such practices can be identified in almost all fields
of human activities (by systematic surveillance and benchmarking of a large

number of organizations), dis-embedded, and thereafter traded and spread,
A best practice can be defined as “a set of interrelated work activities repeat-

edly utilized by individuals or groups” (Tucker et al., 2007) that is accepted as
being better than all other known practices because it is supposed to lead to
results that are superior to results that are superior to those caused by other

known practices.
Within the knowledge transfer industry, benchmarking is the rational-

ized, scientized, and legitimate method for identifying and comparing almost
all kinds of organizational practices—and finding the superior ones among
them: that is, those that are held as responsible for the greatest performance
and competitive differences between organizations (Bendell et al., 1998).
The American consultant company Arthur Andersen was one of the first
to systematize the identification, dis-embedding, and transfer of best prac-
tices based on a benchmarking strategy. This strategy has been thoroughly
described in a book authored by three Arthur Andersen-senior consultants
(Hiebeler et al., 1998). The book provides an interesting window into the
notions, theories, arguments, and technology that drive what Sanwal (2008.
52) calls the ideology of “best practicism,’ and also insights into how the
search for such practices is organized. Firstly, Arthur Andersens “Global
Best Practice Database” was based on the premise that a common feature
of al types of organizations (public services, governmental units, business
units, interest groups, etc.) is that they are all formal organizations (Rovik,
2007). Therefore, although they are different, they are variations of the same

Outsiders as d

knowledge trading that emerge


Reframing Knowledge Transfer as Acts of Translations 123

system. This is an important premise for the notion that they all need and
can use more or less the same ideas and practices (Jacobsson, 1994: Brun-
sson and Sahlin-Andersson, 2000; Røvik, 2012: Bromley and Meyer, 2017).
Hiebeler et alis (1998) second premise is that all organizations” practices
can be subsumed and classified into 260 subprocesses, which are then varia-
tions of a set of 13 so-called first-level processes. According to these authors,
this process approach makes it possible for consultants to (a) use their
classification of processes and practices to identify the corresponding pro-
cesses and practices in concrete organizations, and (b) to benchmark the
practices and results of each process in a concrete organization with infor-
mation in the database about the corresponding processes and practices. The
Arthur Andersen approach is typical of many large and medium-sized con-
sultant companies’ best practice and benchmarking strategies (Walgenbach

and Hegele, 2001; Kieser, 2002: Castro and Frazzon, 2017; Madsen et al.,
2017).

However, consulting companies that have adopted the benchmarking strat-

egy outlined above face many challenges when it comes to identifying
organizational best practices and transferring them to high-fidelity represen-
tations. One challenge is to ensure that the practices in the consultancies’
databases really correspond to the practices identified in concrete organi-
zations. This requires that enormous empirical variations of organizational
processes and practices be reduced and subsumed in a far less complex
classification of such practices. Another challenge is the problem of orga-
nizational practices that are embedded in, and thus dependent upon their
contexts, which means that it is often hard to overview and know which
factors have generated which results (Davies and Kochhar, 2002). Well-
stein and Kieser (2011) conducted one of the few empirical studies of how
consultant companies cope with these and other challenges related to iden-

tifying, translating, and transferring organizational best practices. The study
was based on quantitative data from 152 large and medium-sized consul-

tancies consulting on strategy and organizational design in the German
market, as well as qualitative data from in-depth interviews with a sample
of individual consultants. They found that most of the consulting companies
used benchmarking as their main method for identifying and transferring
best practices. However, they also found that their definitions and under-
standings of best practice differed significantly between the consultants,
and among consultants belonging to the same company. They also revealed
vaguely agreements about how exactly to identify such practices. Wellstein
and Kieser showed that consultants tend to conceive of practices as solutions
that can easily be identified and transferred within as well as between separate


124 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

y also focused on the consultants’ opinions

kiness factors in identifying best practices
ntations of them. The quantitative study

€ causal ambiguity and the complexities
s as a main challenge and threat to

realizing the ambition of identifying and representing best practices. Well-
stein and Kieser also found a strong inhibiting effect due to the consulting

companies’ lack of absorptive capacity, meaning that the consultancies them-
selves have limited capacity to absorb and understand—and thus to describe

and communicate to potential customers/target organizations—the causal-
ity structures involved in the best practices they have identified in source

organizations.

and different organizations. The
' ce .
and experiences concerning stic

and in making high-fidelity represe
revealed that consultants conceive O

of practices’ embeddedne

Expatriates as de-contextualizers | |
Old Norse mythology includes the narrative of Huginn and Muninn, the

two ravens of the god Odin, the most powerful and knowledgeable of all
the Nordic gods (Sturlusson, 1964). While the Old Norse meaning of Hug-

inn is “thought? the meaning of Muninn is “memory. Every morning,
the two ravens fly out from Odin’s residence, Valaskjalv, and all over the

world (“Midgard”) to collect information for Odin. When they return in the
evening, they sit down on Odin’s shoulders and inform the god about the

knowledge they have collected on their journey. This keeps Odin updated
and is a main source of his knowledge and his status as the omniscient god.
The tale of Huginn and Muninn has parallels to modern transnational

organizations’ usage of expatriates—so-called international assignments. An
“expatriate” is an employee who is sent abroad to work in a subsidiary unit

for periods of varying length, while an “repatriate” is an expatriate who
returns to his/her domestic organization, either the headquarter or other

units from where they departed (Antal, 2001; McEvoy and Buller, 2013). Such
international assignments have increased within transnational organizations
(Stahl et al., 2009), partly as a way to spread knowledge from headquarters
to subsidiaries, and partly to identify valuable practices and knowledge in
subsidiaries abroad and to speed up the transfer of such knowledge to other
units.

Here, the focus is upon the potential for expatriates to identify and
de-contextualize practices and their appurtenant knowledge bases in sub-
sidiaries. Expatriates’ access to such knowledge in subsidiaries differs from
that of outsiders (such as external consultants) in two important respects. The
first is that expatriates, unlike outsiders, are members of the transnational
organization, and therefore belong to a knowledge-sharing community.


Reframing Knowledge Transfer as Acts of Translations 125

The second difference is that they reside—albeit temporarily—in the sub-
sidiary organization, which obviously increases their chances of access-
ing valuable knowledge. However, an expatriates access to knowledge will
depend on the length of the stay: the longer the stay, the more access. Data
from the World Bank on multinational organizations usage of expat works
shows that the length of the assignments has fallen. In 2008, 66 percent of
the total assignments were long-term (duration of more than one year, typi-
cally three years), while only 45 percent of 2014 assignments were long-term
(Tung, 1987; Harrison, 2016),

What do expatriates bring with them from subsidiaries? Research shows
that they frequently develop networks and social ties with members of the
subsidiary organization (Hocking et al., 2007; Burmeister, 2017; Peltoko-
rpi et al., 2022). Such ties facilitate the expatriates own cultural adjustment
(Farh et al., 2010) and are an important source to increased trust (Hansen,
2002; Reiche 2012), and therefore a potential ticket to embedded knowledge
(Downes and Thomas, 1999: Burmeister, 2017). Research also shows that the
social capital that expatriates develop during their stays abroad can provide
access and shorten the route to subsidiary knowledge long after the assignees
have repatriated to their home bases (Reiche, 2012).

Few studies have documented what kind of knowledge expatriates are
interested in and try to identify, translate, and transfer, and even fewer

studies have looked at how they do that. In one of the first studies of repa-
triates, Antal (2000) distinguished between five types of knowledge that
repatriates may bring with them home: know that (declarative), know how
(procedures, routines), know when (conditional), know why (axiomatic),
and know whom (relational). In a study of expatriates from Austrian com-
mercial banks, Fink and Meierewert (2005) found that expatriates often
identify and transfer knowledge of relatively high translatability, such as lan-
guage, and about technical issues. However, they sometimes also acquire
access to less codifiable knowledge, such as job-related management skills,
and local experience-based knowledge about problem solving. Oddou et al.
(2013) studied knowledge gained by a sample of expatriates who repatri-
ated to their home bases in Germany (15), Japan (17), and the United States
(15). Their main finding were that expatriates had gained new networks
(know who), acquired global mindsets (know why), and developed some new
competencies (know how). They sometimes also identify and try to make rep-
resentations of valuable knowledge and practices of low translatability (tacit,
complex, and embedded). However, neither this nor other studies have spec-
ified in detail to what extent or how expatriates are involved in detecting and

de-contextualizing practices of low translatability.


126 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

Insiders as de-contextualizers

Insiders—that is, actors Who are based within the organization where the

desired practice to be de-contextualized are performed—can, 7 addition
to outsiders and expatriates, also perform de-contextualization O Practices,
Insiders are individuals who are members of the source organization where

the desired practice is located. Certåin insiders can act as de-contextualizers
(or “outbringers”), in the sense that they make representations of a prac-

tice that they know well, and which they mediate in different ways and on

different arenas outside their organization. | |
Various types of insiders can act as de-contextualizers and outbringers

of knowledge about certain organizational practices. There are upper-level

as well as lower-level outbringers. Typical upper-level outbringers are top
leaders (executives and CEOs) who are clearly associated with successes in
their organization. Great successes, especially in large, well-known organi-
zations, are sometimes springboards for their top leaders to be invited to
various external arenas to give speeches about “the secrets’ of the successes,

In addition to speeches, probably the most prominent way for top leaders to
bring out their versions of certain organizational successes is to write a book

about it and popularize their success formula. Examples of publications in
this genre are Iacocca and Novak (1986), who wrote about how Lee Iacocca,

CEO of Chrysler throughout the 1980s, changed the automaker company and
brought it back from the brink of collapse. Packard et al. (1995) presented “the
secrets” of the success of Hewlett & Packard—as told by David Packard—and

how he and his colleague managed to found a company “in a one-car garage
workshop” that later became the famous science park of Silicon Valley. In his
book, Sam Walton, the founder of Wal-Mart, tells the story of how the suc-
cessful American retail business was created (Walton and Huey, 1993), and
Mary Kay Ash, who built one of the world’s largest cosmetic retailers, writes
about the principles behind her organizations success (Ash, 2008).

While top leaders of large organizations are obviously the most exposed
and best-known outbringers, de-contextualization and outbringing by indi-
viduals in other, lower positions in the organization are probably even more
common. Typical outbringers are middle managers, project managers, team
leaders and members, etc. who become associated with a certain practice and
are invited to present and talk about the practice in various arenas outside
their own organization.

Røvik (2007) studied a sample of such lower-level outbringers. The overar-
ching research purpose was to find out what characterizes the practices that
the outbringers bring out, and how they do it. To be included in the sam-
ple, the following four criteria had to be fulfilled: (1) What is brought out


etence on vari
NE a 1OUS aspects of working life, such as leadership, budget-
ing, as ree ee resources, and technology innovations. These are
aren uisiders associated with certain successful practices are fre-

es g in such arenas are only taking part in
the de-contextualization of a Practice. Thus, as a rule, they are not involved

in the other half” of the knowledge transfer process; that is, the contextual-
ization of the representation in a target organization. Fifteen outbringers and

their appurtenant practices were initially identified and included. After closer

examination, three were excluded, meaning that the study sample contained
12 outbringers.

outlined below. The first was a practice termed wish rotation planning. This
is a practice for how to plan the rotation of personnel within healthcare

field (whereby the leader or the administrator fairly autonomously works
out the authoritative rotation plan for the next period), the wish rotation
planning practice required that all employees and the leader met every sixth
week. In such a meeting, anyone was allowed and encouraged to present and
argue for his/her wishes for the next six-week rotation plan. Then there was
a negotiation and balancing process. The meeting ended once the new rota-
tion plan had been settled. According to the inventor and outbringer, this
rotation planning practice is a procedure that increases employee involve-
ment, enhances legitimacy, prevents conflicts, and reduces sickness absence.

Another example is a professional grief-process practice. In this case, the out-
bringer was a hospital priest who had become known and widely respected

for his professional methods and practice of approaching people in critical life


128 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

situations, such as life-threatening illnesses. A third example was the practice
of design ¢ ogsjonal customer service center. Based on his

is | fa prof
of design and operation 0 ÅÅ th Hewlett & Packard, this outbringer medij-

own experience from working :
ated insights about good practices for how to develop and run å service center

for customers in large organizations. |
, hat characterizes the twelve practices

‘ons in this study were, W
Key questions in thi y do they have anything in

that these outbringers present at external arenas, hey i
common. One central suggestion concerned the practices translatability. It

was hypothesized that suc
translatability, more than by outsiders an

contextualized and translated by insiders;
have been involved in performing the prac
that among the included practices there wou

practices characterized by low translatability.
To test this suggestion, the twelve practices were analyzed according to

operationalized criteria of two ofthethree determining variables of translata-

bility: complexity and embeddedness. (The practices’ degree of explicitness”
were not analyzed, partly because of methodological challenges, and partly

because the outbringers themselves had all made explicit versions of their
practices). “Degree of complexity” was operationalized as follows: (a) Is the
practice mostly performed without (1 point) or with (0 point) the use of
technology? (b) Are there many—ten or more (1 point)—or few—fewer
than ten (0 points)—individuals involved in the performance of the practice?
(c) Does the performance of the practice require involvement of individuals

with experience-based special competence? Yes (1 point). No (0 point). The
maximum points per practice was three, which indicates high complexity.

Zero points indicates low complexity.
“Embeddedness” is operationalized as follows: (a) Low embeddedness—all

relevant inputs required to perform the practice (such as knowledge, skills,
budget, technology, decision-making authority, and workers) are highly spa-
tially concentrated; that is, located within the actual organizational unit (1
point). (b) Medium embeddedness—some of the relevant input resources
required to perform the practice are located in other units of the organi-
zation; that is, outside the unit where the practice is performed (2 points).
(c) High embeddedness—several of the input resources required to perform
the practice are located in networks that connect the organizational unit with
different parts of the environment (3 points).

Findings. A high score (maximum 6) indicates low translatability, while
a low score indicates high translatability. Eight of the 12 practices were
appointed a score of 6 or 5, two practices scored 4 and one practice scored 3.

d expatriates, will need to be de-
that is, by actors who themselves
tice. Thus, the suggestion was
Id be an overrepresentation of

——

ere it is supposed to be materialized, it comes into
a context of å more-or-less fixed Physical structure (buildings, spaces, rooms,

walls, furnishings, etc.) and a formal organizational structure, which defines
a hierarchy and the division of work. Further, there are various technologies
in use, established routines and procedures, informal networks, communica-
tion patterns, and organizational cultures and meaning-production systems
that provide lenses for interpreting and making sense of the organizations
history, as well as its present and future. Finally yet importantly, a target
organization includes individuals who act according to reasons, interests, and

emotions, using their knowledge and skills to perform existing tasks. Contex-

is introduced. The concept of contextualization encompasses cognitive pro-
cesses, but also, as highlighted by Reay et al. (2013), concrete materialization
processes of transforming the representations into practices and to physical,
repeated activities.

Analytically, we can distinguish between three key processes involved in
contextualization. These are conceptualization, that is, processes whereby the
translator gains knowledge about the target context and existing practices,
configuration, that is, processes of relating the source practice representation
to target context features, and inscribing, that is, translation processes where
meaning, which connects “the new” to the target organizational context, is
ascribed to the introduced foreign practice. Although they are presented in


130 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

ing, these processes are, in reality, highly

the above sequence in the follow 7 |
: Imost parallel in time and involve Various

intertwined. Thus, they may run å
and shifting groups of actors.

Conceptualizing the target organizational context

f a source practice, translators need to

gain knowledge about the target organizational context. The outcomes—
successes or failures—depend partly on how knowledgeable the translator

is about the target organization (Rovik, 2016). Within the domain of trans.

lation studies, the care for such knowledge comes to expression in normg
for translators to adhere to the target context. According to influential schol.

ars, particularly within Skopos theory (Vermeer, 1978; Honig and Ku&maul,
1982), and the manipulation school (Hermans, 1985/2014; Toury, 1985), this
means being especially sensitive to the logics and the needs of the target con-
text and, subsequently, designing translated versions of the source practice
premised on anticipations of whether and how it will fit in and work in the

target context. However, for translators it can be challenging to gain knowl.
edge about the target context. How challenging it is depends on features of the
target context practices—that is, their translatability—and on the location of

the translators.
Just as the translatability of the source practice is a key variable with which

to understand the challenges of translating such practices to abstract rep-

resentations, the translatability of existing target organization practices is
important in order to get a clearer picture of the challenges that transla-

tors face when attempting to gain knowledge about such practices. Here,
“translatability” refers to how easy or difficult it is for the translators to

obtain accurate knowledge about various existing practices in the target
context—practices that may interfere directly or indirectly with the source
practice representation determined to be implemented. The translatability
of existing target practices can be analyzed in terms of the same three vari-
ables as those used to analyze source practices: explicitness, complexity, and

embeddedness,

To conceptualize a representation 0

Explicitness of existing target practices

As defined earlier in this chapter, the features of explicitness are codified,
verbalized, easily taught and written knowledge, while tacitness refers to
nonverbalized, noncodified, and nonstandardized knowledge. The knowl-
edge and skills of actors involved in the performance of existing practices


ferent locations on the coalface (the place inside a mine where the coal is
cut out of the rock). The coal was obtained by a combination of blasting
and the use of a pick, then loaded on tubs and transported by hand power
to the pithead. The working unit of three men was largely self-contained.
The members performed all the tasks necessary to produce coal—such as
blasting, picking, loading the tubs, and transporting the coal. The working
groups were also relatively autonomous in relation to the deputy (the local
manager). The deputy was the first-line supervisor for 15 up to 20 work-
ing units. His function was limited to securing the mine from accidents of
explosions and falls, in addition to organizing the transportation of coal out
from each team. Thus, the deputy’s role in relation to the team was more of a
supplier than of a manager. The teams “required neither instruction nor coor-
dination” (Trist and Bamforth, 1951: 215). Each team decided and organized
its own work autonomously and was paid each week for the coal volume it
produced. The members of the team were independent craftsmen who had
learned their skills not from their employers, but from their fathers and rel-

atives (Goldthorpe, 1959). They even used their own tools and “powder”
(explosives) in the mines. They were often recruited to the teams through

family and kinship ties.
Between the two World Wars, longwall mining—a rather new method

of coal-getting—was being implemented on a massive scale in British coal
mines. This method, which originated in England in the late seventeenth
century, and was radically developed in the United States with the use
of machinery in the beginning of the twentieth century, is a method for


ea long wall, sometimes hundreds of Meters

long, containing seams of coal, is mined in a single slice (Penn and Simp-
son, 1986). During the interwar period (1918- 1940), the British coal industry

was largely mechanized, primarily through the introduction of electric coal.-
yor belts, which automatized the transportation

cutting machines and conve | |
of coal out from the mines. The 'ntroduction of new coal-getting methods
and new technology were accompanied by scientific management-inspired

The system of self-contained teams with

rinciples for work organizing.
princip d all tasks involved in the coal-mining

multi-skilled miners who performe | |
process was replaced by a strong division of labor into three shifts: one for

cutting the coal, another for ripping the coal, and a third shift for fillers
(workers who use shovels and load coal on the conveyor belts). Following

the logic of the Ford fabric assembly line—organizing, the work process was
clearly sequenced (cutting shift, ripping shift, and filling shift) and could not

be changed. The multitasking character of work in the self-contained teams
andardization and specializing at the individual level, Each
In addition,

underground coal mining wher

was replaced by st
worker should not perform more than one or two operations.

the role of the deputy changed dramatically. In the new organizing of min-
ing, the deputy was supposed to coordinate and execute tight control over

each individual worker's performance of their operations.
In a renowned research program, starting at the Tavistock Institute in Lon-

don in the late 1940s, Eric Trist and Ken Bamforth studied the consequences

of introducing the new technology and the new principles of work organiz-
ing in the British coal mines. They concentrated on studying fillers shifts,

where most men worked. In their seminal 1951 paper, they showed that
the new methods and principles had severe effects on the colliers. The “self-
autonomy” from the handgot system was lost and the fillers now experienced
“isolated dependence” (pp. 24-25), meaning that each filler now worked

alone in his stint, not interacting with or even seeing other colleagues. Absen-
teeism was high, and a strong norm of low productivity developed among
the fillers. These were the behaviors that Trist and Bamforth (1951) used to

explain workers’ adaptation to the new organizing principles.

The above case from the British mining industry is an example of new
technology and practices that were introduced in an organizational con-
text and led to serious tensions in relation to existing ideas and practices of
work organizing. Trist and Bamforth’s explanation of why the transfer and
implementation of new technology and work organizing collided with exist-
ing practices and caused severe unanticipated consequences is centered on
an argument of low explicitness of important aspects of the existing prac
tices. They found that the problems of absenteeism, morale hazard, and low


Reframing Knowledge Transfer as Acts of Translations 133

also effects of the almost total dominating engineering logic and appur-
tenant language among the top leaders, middle managers, and local deputies.
This engineering logic was an effective hindrance for leaders to conceptu-

alize the psychological and Sociological roots of the problems: “That they

psychological terms, is something that still remains largely unrecognized.

Accounts sp far appearing, have presented recent changes almost exclusively
in engineering terms” (Trist and Bamforth, 1951: 10).

Complexity of existing target practices

The ability of a translator to conceptualize, comprehend, and consider exist-
ing target practices when implementing new practices also depends on
the complexity of existing practices. ‘The greater the complexity of existing
practices—that is, the more such practices are characterized by high num-
bers of involved actors, crisscrossing relationships and intricate coordinating
mechanisms among those involved, ambiguous connections between causes
and effects, and modest use of technology—the less the translatability of the
practice and, therefore, the more challenging it is for the translator to gain a
high-fidelity representation of the practice. The complexity of existing prac-
tices makes it hard for the translator to relate and deliberately calibrate “the
new’ with “the old” and which therefore increases chances for translation
failures.

This theoretical argument can be illustrated using an example from the
Indo-Norwegian Project (INP), which was the Norwegian government's
technical-economic aid project in Kerala (a state on the southwestern coast
of India) in the period 1953-1972. The aim of the project was to help mod-
ernize the Kerala fish industry, in addition to improving water supply and
health conditions for the population in two selected fishing communities.
The plan was to achieve these aims by transfer of knowledge, technology, and
money from Norway to Kerala. Modernization of the fish industry was the
main aim. This part of the project had two pillars. One was to increase the
supply of motorized fishing boats with mechanized equipment. By the start
of the project in 1953, about 95 percent of the Kerala fishing fleet consisted

ER a eee eee


134 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

of the project, the motorized fleet haq

ized canoes. By the end
of nonmotorized ca y d approximately 4500 boats (Hareide

increased dramatically and comprise

1965).

The other main pill

to increase the efficiency of the marketing, “ve
catches. The most important modernizing means that used to realize

this ambition was attempts to establish a sales and marketing system based
on cooperative business principles; that is, a business organization owned

and controlled by the people who use its products, supplies, or services, The
principles of cooperative organizing of fish industries were transferred by the

project experts from Norway, where they were widely practiced from the late
1940s to the early 1960s (Finstad, 2005). However, the new principles that
INP tried to implement soon impinged upon existing and highly complex
local practices based on other principles for the marketing, sale, and dis.
tribution of caught fish. These were practices that the INP experts had not

conceptualized and comprehended when they started to implement the new

principles of fishery organizing they had brought with them from Norway,
The existing and very old principles and practices of fish sales and dis-
tribution in the southwestern part of India were revealed by Arne Martin

Klausen, a Norwegian anthropologist who did his fieldwork in the region
from 1960-1962 (Klausen, 1968). What he found was that the traditional

fish sales and distribution system involved numerous actors, many types of
transactions, complex sets of roles and relationships, and intricate division

of labor. The fish catches were landed by the fishing canoes on the beach—
which were the location where the first transactions took place: “The beach

sale of the fish appears at first sight to be carried out without any plan and
practically like a struggle for life’ (Klausen, 1968: 140). This phase involved
transactions between the different types of fish merchants, agents, and the
fishermen, and often resembled planned auctions. The middlemen (that is,
the local merchants and agents) played very important roles, not least because
they often had some capital, which they lent to the fishermen. In practice, the
loan transactions bound the fishermen to this group of actors. However, the
sales and distribution of fish (which was either salted or dried) involved many
other types of merchants and transactions. One such type was “the bicycle
merchants’—mostly Muslims who bought fish from beach middlemen and
then biked and sold the fish to their customers at places up to 100 km into the
interior part of the county. Then there were groups of “lorry merchants '—
truck owners who also bought fish from the beach middlemen and made
their incomes from selling fish to customers living at quite a distance from
the coast. A third type of merchants was “the basket women”—poor women

ar of the INP initiative was rooted in an ambition
sale, and distribution of fish


from the local fishing village who

could earn money b | |
big baskets up to 10-15 km to their citstomers y Dy carrying the fish in

[n sum, the traditional sale i stri
and ystems were characterized by

such as unmotorized canoes, bicy-

ent upon each other and, conse-
ng. Therefore, the involved actors
and protecting the existing practices of fish

quently, upon the system, to make a livi

complexity of the existing syst
stakes in the existing practices,
them.

The project leaders’ failure to conce

ing practices had unforeseen Consequences. INP launched two initiatives to

modernize the sales and distribution system. One was the building of an ice
factory and a cold storage plant with the aim of i

ptualize the complexity of the exist-

erative organization was also an attempt to remove the middlemen, which
INP conceived of “only as moneylenders and ruthless usurers” (Klausen,
1968: 147). However, none of these initiatives were successful. For many years
the capacity of the ice fabric and the cold storage plant were poorly exploited,
and mostly used to store fish caught by INP’s own experiment boats rather
than by the local fishermen. It took several years to realize the plan of estab-
lishing a cooperative organization, partly due to skepticism, lack of support,
and open resistance from actors within the local fishing community. When
the cooperative sale and distribution organization was established in October
1961, it led to higher and more stable prices. However, higher prices did not
mean that the fishermen stopped selling to the local middlemen. This was
due to uncertainty among the fishermen about what could happen when the
INP program was terminated. They preferred to maintain the stable and well-
known relationship with the middlemen, who provided them with loans and
access to the markets. In addition, almost all of the various types of merchants
involved in the numerous transactions generated by the fish sales and dis-
tribution opposed the INP’s cooperative organization, mostly because they

feared that it could destroy their own niches in the system.
This Kerala case exemplifies how complexity can mask and lower the
translatability of existing practices in an organizational context, and be an


ation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

136 ATransl
translators involved in implementing New

important source of failures for
ideas in the same context.

Embeddedness of existing target practices |
The opportunity for translators to discover and obtain accurate knowledge of

existing target context practices will also depend on the practices’ degree of
embeddedness, such as whether the knowledge base and other prerequisites
ly located. Thus, it could be demar.

for how the target practice works is clear |
tion in focus or dispersed and

cated and concentrated in the target organiza
hips and other networks that connect the target

floating in social relations
organizational context to the wider society. Another case from the Indo-

Norwegian project in Kerala provi bs
of an existing practice can lead to low translatability, and consequently to

insufficient transparency for translators concerned with implementing new
practices. The main part of the project was attempts to modernize the Kerala
fishing fleet with bigger, motorized, and better equipped boats. The aim was

to increase catches and stabilize the supply of fish to the markets. However,

while implementing the fleet modernizing project, the INP experts noticed
that different groups of fishermen reacted very differently to the attempts, To

understand the different reactions, it is necessary to note that the chosen geo-

graphic area for the project was exceedingly heterogeneous in terms of castes,
cultures, and religions. The area contained two distinct fishing communities

that lived in two different villages: the Latin Catholics in the southern part,

and the Hindu fishing population (the Arayas) in the northern village. While
the Catholic fishing population were enthusiastic and rapidly obtained and
started to use the modern boats, the Arayas were much more reluctant and

often refused to accept the offers of such boats.

Although the INP experts gradually registered the different reactions,
they were not able to understand why it happened (Klausen, 1968). The
main interpretation among the experts of why some fishermen avoided new,
modern boats was that it reflected cases of individuals who were unfitted
for modern fishery. However, through anthropological fieldwork, Klausen
(1968) revealed that the Araya reluctance to accept modernized boats was
that they feared that it would lead to new fishing practices that would collide
with suggestions and beliefs deeply embedded in the Hindu society of Araya.
For example, the Arayas strongly resisted accepting the most effective type
of boat, a 25-foot highly mechanized vessel with a powerful engine (Hareide,
1965). The Arayas were very reluctant to explain why, but Klausen (1968)
revealed that the main reason for the avoidance behavior was that accepting

the most modern boats would imply that they also had to accept night fishing.


fjelds of European technology and economy
purely technical and statistical data, I think th

of interest in the negative reactions of the Arayas. (Klausen, 1968: 138)

the experts are inclined to focus on
IS IS One of the main reasons for lack

To = uP RE meaning processes whereby translators gain
knowleage abou | € target context, is one out of three typical contextualiza-
tion processes. Ås illustrated above, the ability of translators to gain knowl-

edge about catering practices, and then consider them, will partly depend on
the practices degree of explicitness, complexity, and embeddedness

Configuring new and existing practices

The second typical feature of contextualization is configuration. It refers to
processes where translators relate target and source contexts and practices
to each other, and where certain versions of the source practice are arrived
at and appropriated to fit into the target organizational context. Configura-
tion processes vary greatly in course and content and in the extent to which

they are planned. Sometimes they are planned in detail and attempted to be
carried out by translators who are conscious about the challenges involved

in extracting practices and knowledge from certain places and move them
to other places to try and make them work there (Rovik, 1998). ‘The ratio-

nal ideal of configuration is a process where a group of translators, who are
knowledgeable of both the source and the target organizations, intensively
relate the contexts to each other and try to find solutions to the challenges of

not losing the essentials of the source practice and knowledge, while simulta-
erate adaptations to make a translated version work

neously undertaking delib
2004; Bausch et al., 2022). In prac-

in the target context (Graham and Logan,
tice, however, configuration processes are often not in line with this rational

ideal. Processes of knowledge transfer between organizations are often poorly
planned, and frequently involve translators who do not possess and combine


138 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

knowledge about the source and the target contexts, as illustrated in the above |
examples of knowledge transfer to British coal mines and to fishing Villageg

in Kerala. h
The challenges of configuring source and target contexts when translat.

ing knowledge and practices have a parallel in highly researched challenges
within the domain of translation studies of how to overcome various trans.
lation barriers when translating a text from one language to another. Such

barriers are especially associated with instances of considerable dissimi.

larities between source and target languages. Configuration challenges in
arriving at an acceptable target version of a source text are especially present

when a source and a target language are very different (as with Chinese ver-
sus English). Correspondingly, in knowledge transfer across organizationa|

contexts, the degree of dissimilarity/similarity on certain variables can be
decisive for how challenging it is to configure. A lot of research indicates that
increasing the distance between source and target organizations—in terms

of geography (proximity) (Cooke, 2001, Beissinger et al., 2017), culture (De
Long and Fahey, 2000), especially national culture (Kedia and Bhagat, 1988:

Kogut and Singh, 1988), and institutional arrangements, such as a coun-
trys laws and formal rules (Kostova, 1999; Claus et al., 2021)—increases the
potential for distortions in communication, for stickiness, and thus, for mis.

fit when translating knowledge across such borders. Conversely, the more
similar the source and target organizational contexts are on critica] vari-
ables such as those mentioned above, the lower the risk for stickiness and

for configuration failures.
Configuring challenges are, not least, about how the representation of

source practices to be implemented relates to existing structures, Practices,
and interests in the target organization. Analytically, one can delineate

three main types of relatedness—briefly: loose coupling, weaving, and replace-
ment —each representing different levels of configuring challenges.

Loose coupling” means that the new practice is only loosely related
to established practices, and therefore does not directly affect them. For
example, an organization may attempt to implement and recreate a structural
unit observed in another organization—such as units of research and devel-

opment, HRM, marketing, and communication. New structural components,
like those mentioned above, can sometimes be added to and inserted in the
existing formal organizational structure, with only modest consequences for
existing structural components and for the practices performed by employ-
ees within them (Revik, 2007). Thus, it is likely that instances of such loose
couplings between new and existing practices can simplify the configuration
processes,

—


Reframing Knowledge Transfer as Acts of Translations 139

ce v0” :
Weaving refers Processes whereby the new practice is seen in compari-
son and interlaced with one or more

existing practices. It usually presupposes
rocesses than in cases of loose coupling.

ple in a study of attempts to incorporate

into an established system of healthcare

dm | Canada. They revealed in detail the microprocesses
involved in the weaving work of trying to fit the new role of a nurse profes-

sional ane an institutionalized system where the physician was the central
authority. The challenge was to arrive at a fit where the role of the nurse
professional differed substantially from the role of ordinary nurses while
simultaneously avoiding developing a role that too much resembled and
challenged the physicians’ domain. The previously presented INP project
provides another example. As mentioned, one of the new ideas transferred
from Norway to be materialized was to establish a cold storage place to pre-
serve the local fishermen's catches in frozen form. However, after INP’s sales
organization had been established, the cold plant was hardly used by the local
fishing community. The project leaders were very skeptical about cooperat-
ing with the local private fish merchants because they thought it would not
fit in with the mission and the logic of the state-owned development project.
Nor would the fish merchants cooperate with the INP, because they viewed
the project as a threat to their commercial interests. However, in the final
phase of the Kerala project, a cold storage plant in another part of Southern
India broke down. It forced the private fish merchants to come to an agree-
ment with INP about renting their cold storage plant. This triggered many
instances where the INP and the private fish merchants’ practices were, for
the first time, blended and interlaced with each other. For example, four pri-
vate fish merchant firms established business firms in close cooperation with
INP's cooperative sales organization. However, the practical configuration of
INP's cooperative-inspired practices with the merchants’ practices based on
local business traditions turned out to be complicated and time-consuming.
Practices had to be seen in comparison and adjusted to each other. While new
roles and routines gradually emerged, the process also evoked skepticism and
resistance from actors both within INP and among the fish merchants. This

illustrates some of the challenges for translators involved in weaving new and
existing practices.

“Replacement” means that the new practice replaces one or more existing
practices in the target organization. The case of introducing new technology

and scientific management-inspired principles of work organizing in British
coal mines in the 1930s and 1940s (commented on earlier in this chapter)

superseded the existing work organization principles and practices of the

organizing in Alberta,

| E


140 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

e an
colliers. At first glance, replacement may seem thot pm ategy to
perform than weaving, since it presumably does not involve complicated Pro.

cesses of trying to interlace new technology and pr va with existing ones
to make it work, However, of the three outlined strategies, this is probably the

one with the highest potential to offend interests and release resistance amon 9
actors involved in the performance of the existing practices. The obvious tea.
son is that such actors may expect a loss of value of their knowledge and Skills

(Jacobsen, 2004: Schmitt et al., 2012) and may even face the risk of losing their
jobs. Therefore, replacement strategies often increase the pressure on transla.
tors and leaders to handle violated interests and resistance to change (Bateh
et al., 2013). Replacement is also a risky strategy, because a sudden replace.
ment of existing practices with new ones can lead to poor performances
and decreasing results stemming from a combination of resistance to change

and a lack of knowledge and skills to perform the new practices effectively,
as demonstrated in Trist and Bamforth’s (1951) study of the replacement

strategy in U.K. coal mines.

Inscribing the new practice in the target context

A third typical feature of the contextualization phase is processes of inscrib-
ing, which means that a new practice—a materialized representation of
practices from foreign contexts—is interpreted and ascribed various markers
that connect the new practice to the target context and increase the chances
of being recognized and accepted among local actors. To “inscribe” involves
actively relating and interpreting the imported practice to the target organi-
zations space and time context. Analytically, one can distinguish between
localizing (ascribing local context markers to the new practice) and timing
(ascribing local time markers to the practice),
Processes of localizing a foreign practice have a parallel in insights from
translation studies, and especially in studies of the translation of dramas
from their original to other languages, In dramas, actors, actions and con-
texts are often strongly interrelated, Therefore, translating a drama to other
languages and contexts often presupposes what Brisset (1989) termed “te-
territorialization; which means moving the drama into the new language and
the surrounding contexts to make it recognizable and comprehensible there.
Røvik (1998) studied how two global management concepts (Management by
Objectives (MBO) and Total Quality Management (TQM)) stemming from
large business firms were translated and inscribed into various Norwegian

public sector organizations. The study showed that broad attempts were made


Reframing Knowledge Transfer ag Acts of Translations 141

to localize the foreign concepts, for example by renaming, which means that

igned new local linguistic labels that
S attitudes and challenges.

tibe the new practice, with its history
e frame of the local target organiza-
ture. For example, Røvik's study (1998)

“Timing” refers to attempts to insc
from a foreign context, into the tim
tion, meaning its past, present, and fy

Management concepts for symbolic

cepts were adopted before there we

re clear images of what problems they
should solve. However,

| | the study also revealed substantial evidence of ex post
reinterpretations of history, which attempted to re-establish that the adoption

of the concept was rationally calculated imports of solutions to solve real local
problems that had emerged in the organizations at an earlier phase.

Summary—Key concepts and arguments

This chapter has reinterpreted knowledge transfer across organizational bor-
ders as acts of translation. Building on salient features from the outer domain
of translation studies, knowledge transfers are conceptualized as containing

two key processes: de-contextualization and contextualization (Figure 4.1).
De-contextualization refers to the translation of an identified practice in a

source organization and its knowledge base into an abstract representation—
expressed in images, words, texts, pictures, etc. A main challenge of de-
contextualization is conceptualized in terms of the desired source practice’s
translatability, that is, the extent to which a particular practice in an orga-
nizational context can be translated to an abstract representation without
excluding the elements required for how it functions in the source context.
Three variables are theorized as decisive for a source practice's translatability.
1) The practice complexity, which is constituted by two intertwined factors.
The first is the human-technology factor (the ratio between human beings
and technology involved in the performance of the practice). The more the
accomplishment of a practice is based on coordinated actions among a high
number of actors, and the less it is based on technology with a clear-cut
application, the more complex it is. The second is the causal ambiguity fac-
tor (the extent to which observed desired results in a source organization


SSAN.LIDI TAXI

SSANGYAGIENT

ALIXATANOD

LNINIDVTAITY

ONIWLL ONIAVIM :39nDeud 34] UO spuadag
NOLLYZITVDO1 INITdNOD ASOO1 saonpeId yaSre} Suystxo
J° ALTIIGAVLVISNVALL
ssassadoid Suiquosut Asy Om] ‘sad ureur 22191, SY] :>8uapey)

bet |

(seryzead
(emmpPns Sure sur pauo» (ssouead 138121 Sunswxa 19812; Sunsne jnoqe pur 13812)
18171 OY SIoN>IeAd /seapi UB1210] 0} 38poymouy paunsue.n 241 jnoge apajmouy ued og Ån
MIU Sun>uuo» jo $35$22014) Sunepx go $35532014) SJOJPJSUEI £Q212YM $25532014)
INIGRIDSNI NOLLVYUNDIINOD NOLLVZITYNLAYDNOD

NOLLVZINVI94O INHIdIDTET ~~

MQOIMIAQ :UOHEJSUEI JO SIDE Se SJIJSUEN aSpaymouy Ty ainBi4

wAduod TVNOLLVZINVDYO

SJØp1sup -

soyenyedxy -

SIIPISING -
"SJOJLISUE.N JO saddy

SUOUIISNVUL SV SUOLVISNVUL

SYUIAUOY
IVNOILVZINVDUO
SSOUOV UAASNVALL

YDAYTMONM

—

SSINLIDI TAXI <q

SSANGIGGIENT <4

ALIXITANO)D d- RET


Reframing Knowledge Transfer as Acts of Translations 143

can be determined as caused by one or more identified

complexity is associated with increasing uncertainty about the causal link-
ages between a practice and observed effects. 2) The practice’s embeddedness
that is, the extent to which the knowledge that constitute a desired serte
practice is anchored in—and influenced by the social and cultural environ-
ment in which it takes place. 3) The practices explicitness, that is, the degree
to which the knowledge base of a desired source practice is codified ver-
balized and thereby easily articulated—or nonverbalized, noncodified and
tacit. It is argued, that the translatability of a source practice varies with
these three factors: The less complex, more explicit and less embedded, the
more the translatability of the practice increases (as illustrated above with
the cabin crew example), and vice versa (as illustrated with the stockfish
production example). De-contextualization, meaning dis-embedding and
transforming source practices to representations, are processes accomplished
by various groups of actors conceptualized as translators. Translators are not
a homogenous group: they differ, among other things, on the formal roles

they appear in—and on their localization and proximity in relation to the
source organizational context. Three main groups of translators involved in

de-contextualization processes are identified. These are outsiders, expatriates,
and insiders.

Contextualization encompasses processes of translating a representation of
a desired source practice to a new practice in a target organization. Three key-
and highly intertwined processes are involved in contextualization efforts.
These are conceptualization, configuration, and inscribing. Conceptualiza-
tion refers to processes where the translator gain knowledge about the target
organization, such as its history, culture, actors, and existing practices. While
the translatability of various source practices is a key for translators striving to
translate them to abstract representations, the translatability of existing target
organizational practices (that is, how challenging it is for translators to gain
knowledge to arrive at representations that account for the essentials of such
practices) isa key to understand dynamics of the contextualization phase. The
translatability of existing target organizational practices is analyzed in terms
of complexity, embeddedness and explicitness—the same variables as used
to tap the translatability of desired source practices. The chapter illustrates

the importance of the translatability of existing target organization practices
for outcomes of knowledge transfer processes by providing two examples:
the case of knowledge and technology transfer from the United States to the
British coal-mining industry in the mid-war and postwar period, and the
case of the Indo-Norwegian modernization project in Kerala in the period
1953-1972. Configuration encompasses processes where translators relate

practice). Increasing


144 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

e desired source practice with existing target

organization practices. The chapter identifies three main types of configura.
tions between new and existing practices—termed loose coupling, Weaving,
and replacement. Inscribing depicts actions to interpret and ascribe Various
markers to the new and foreign practice that connects it to the meaning stryc.
tures of the target organizational context. The chapter highlights two central]
features of inscribing processes: localization, which is ascribing local] target

context markers to the new, foreign practice, and timing, which is ascribing
local time markers to the practice, thereby associating the foreign practice to

to- and try to fit in images of th

target organization's past, present and future.


D

Revealing the Rules of Knowledge
Translation

Introduction

A central notion in this book is that translators are important actors who reg-
ularly put their marks on the translated and materialized versions of practices
and knowledge that are transferred to target organizations from various outer
sources. However, questions remain about how such actors de facto perform
translation activities. Are there any regularities and grammars of translation
actions that can be revealed, described and analyzed? This chapter develops
the second key argument on which the translation theory is founded, that
is, that translations of practices and knowledge across organizational borders
are rule-based activities. The chapter starts with a discussion of the concept of
social rule—and the notion of translations as rule-based, and thus, patterned
actions. Based on inspirations from the two outer domains (translation stud-
ies and organizational translations) and insights from empirical observations,
I then theorize and outline a typology of translation rules—intending to
account for variations in practices of translating knowledge across organiza-

tional borders. The potential of the typology to map this terrain is illustrated
with reference to empirical examples.

Rules

The concepts of rules are among the most eclectic, tricky, and frequently
referred to concepts in the social sciences, The centrality of the concept
reflects that most human activities are regulated by socially created rules.
Rules are guidelines expected to be followed by actors in various posi-
tions and situations—and come to expression in routines, procedures, habits,
conventions, roles, strategies, codes of conduct, and formal organizational
structures. As a pure biological organism, humans are subjects to few con-
straints on behavior beyond following their instincts. However, a societal
regulating order is constituted by socially produced rules, which constrain

A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer. Kjell Arne Ravik, Oxford University Press. © Kjell Arne Røvik (2023).
DOI: 10.1093/050/9780198832362.003.0005


er
146 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transf

and enable human actions and interactions (Schutz, 1962; Scott, 1987), Rules
but the societal order they create are explicated and

are human products, 2 |
obiectified, and then internalized as taken-for-granted facts succinctly for.
je | (1966) as the social construction of reality

» Berger and Luckmann |
mulated by Berg d, but they can also emerge as unin tender

te
Rules can be deliberately construc
byproducts of long-lasting interactions among å BIOUP of actors (Chris.

tensen et al., 2020)—processes also known from studies of the shaping of

organizational cultures (Schein, 2010; Alvesson, 2012). |
Rules operate—and can be observed both at macro, meso and micro level.

of analysis. Macro-level analysis of rules is often based on insights from new
institutionalism as theoretical framework. Seen in comparison, these Studies
show to what extent and how various rules and rule systems are embeddeqg
in different institutions, such as nations (Hofstede, 1984), governmenta] and
political institutions (March and Olsen, 1989; Ostrom, 1990; Olsen, 2010),
markets and business institutions (Alchian and Demsetz, 1972; North, 1990),
professions (Posner, 1981; Michelotta and Washington, 2013), and media
(Pallas et al., 2016). At the meso level, there are studies of the role of Specific
rule systems in concrete organizations (Selznick, 1949; Clark, 1972) —often

framed as studies of the role of corporate cultures (Denison, 1990; Ojo, 2009),
At the micro level there are, for example, studies of the extent to which and
how formal and informal rules determine individual members’ thoughts and

behavior (Egeberg, 2007; Egeberg and Trondal, 2018).
Individuals choose and follow rules due to different logics and reasons.

Rules can be enforced upon individuals, like upon inmates in prisons
(Cressey, 1959), but they can also be deliberately chosen. For example, Harré

and Secord (1972) in their theory of man as a rule-following agent empha-
size that most social rules that individuals follow are not laws that are forced

upon them. There are often many rules available, some are ignored or bro-
ken, while others are chosen, based on anticipations of gains and losses.
In March and Olsen’s (1989) terms, this is the logic of consequentiality—a
choice of rules based on individuals’ preferences, assessment of various rules,
and expectations about their consequences.

However, rather than being deliberately chosen, rules often come to expres-
sion as habits or routines that are taken for granted and followed without
much reflection. Actors may be socialized into, internalize, and take for
granted rules and rule systems embedded in certain contexts, for example
nations (Hofstede, 1984), professions (Schein, 1970), and certain organiza-
tions (Etzioni, 1961; Van Maanen and Schein, 1978). In contrast to deliberate
choice of rules in line with the logic of consequentiality, rules may be
chosen and followed according to a logic of appropriateness, meaning to act


Revealing the Rules of Knowledge Translation 147

according to what is socially defined as normal, acceptable, right, or good
(March and Olsen, 1995; Christensen and Rovik, 1999).

Rules vary in the extent to which they determine actions. They may be
explicit (codified and written) and prescribe expected actions in detail. In
such cases, rules’ potential to determine actions, are, in general, high (Levitt
and March, 1988). Rules may also be uncodified, broad and imprecise, and
thus, open to actors’ alternative interpretations (Christensen et al., 2020).
Consequentially, linkages between such rules and behavior may be loose.

The relationships between rule following and outcomes are tricky. Appli-
cation of rules are often the antecedents of successful outcomes. Rules are, to
various extent, carriers of accumulated knowledge (Olsen, 2010). The chal-
lenge for an actor who face a problem, is to analyze the situation and search
for 4 rule that matches the challenges (Bunge, 2004). Thus, a simple stimulus
(like an actor who faces a problem and choose a rule) can trigger a rule-based
complex response, for example a standard operating procedure founded on
experience and learning—and which increases chances for problem-solving
(March and Olsen, 1989). As March and Simon (1958) have demonstrated,

there can also be rules guiding actors in questions about when and how to
switch between rules to handle new or changing situations.

However, rule following can also be an important source to failures. There
are, at least, four reasons why undesired outcomes can stem from rule fol-
lowing. First, optimal selection and matching of a rule to handle a situation
presupposes that the organization and its members possess thorough knowl-
edge about the situation. Yet, actors’ knowledge of the situation can be
spare and insufficient—sometimes reflecting that involved actors are only
part-time participants (Cohen et al., 1972). This may lead to choices of non-
matching and inappropriate rules. Second, rules are often uncodified and
only partly verbalized. Thus, actors may try to follow rules that they do not
fully comprehend, and thus, which in turn may lead to failures (Cushman
and Whiting, 1972). Third, an argument put forward by population ecolo-
gists in organization theory (Hannan and Freeman, 1977; Aldrich, 1999) is
that organizations and their members may possess a rather meagre and too
narrow rule repertoire, which may lead to inflexibility and inertia, and thus,
to application of nonmatching rules when conditions change. Fourth, orga-
nizations sometimes develop passions about rules and too much confidence
in them based on past experience. It may lead to “blind” application of a
rule as a standard operating procedure, and correspondingly, to avoidance of
learning from new experiences under different conditions—a phenomenon
Veblen (1914) termed “trained incapacity.’ Thus, to avoid this phenomenon,
organizations should—according to March (1976)—threat “old” experiences

as a theory, and memory as an enemy.


148 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

Searching for rules of translations

The sociology of rules provides us with many insights that are useful in the
search for rules and patterns to better understanding processes of knowl.

edge translation across organizational borders. Do such a exist; are there
any grammar of knowledge translation that can be revealed A general, by:
notwithstanding important insight is that most human activities are regu-
lated by rules—some deliberately constructed and chosen, and others Socially
emerged as byproducts of human interactions. Another appurtenant insight
is that rule-influenced actions settle and come to expression in patterns of
behavior. Correspondingly, it is reasonable to suggest that there are cey.
tain rules, too, that influence translations of knowledge across organizationa|
borders—and that these suggested rules will manifest themselves in discern.
able patterns of behavior and outcomes of translation processes, In searching

to identify translation rules this is important, because any observed patterns
which come to sight when various translation processes are seen in compar-
ison provide a possible route back to the rules that have contributed to the

patterns.

Inspirations from the external domains

The notion of translation rules is also inspired by insights from salient fea-
tures of the two foreign domains—translation studies, and organizational
translation. Within the domain of translation studies and linguistic transla-
tion there are, as showed in Chapter 3, a multitude of translation rules. There
are also many attempts to overview and make typologies of translation rules
(Vinay and Darbelnet, 1958; Nida, 1964; Barkudarov, 1975: Venuti, 2017).
Such typologies are primarily classifications of how languages and cultures
are translated rather than classifications of what is being translated.

Ihe translation rules within the domain of translation studies have some
typical features in common, which is interesting when searching to iden-
tify rules that govern knowledge translation across organizational borders.
First: The translation typologies are all attempts to map the empirical ter-
rain and make representations of existing translation rules used by different
translators—and based on observations of translation practices and pat-
terns. This means that the typologies have clear empirical foundations. Sec-
ond: Most translation rules are codified and verbalized, and can be recognized
and communicated with defined labels—for example Vinay and Darbelnets
(1958) identified and labeled rules as borrowing, calque, literal translation,
transposition, modulation, equivalence, and adaptation. Most professional


Revealing the Rules of Knowledge Translation 149

translators know about these and other translation rules, recognize them,
communicate with other translators about them, and use them in their own
practice. Obviously, knowledge of translation rules spread among translators
within the professional field. However, the spread has also intensified due to
the rapid expansion during the last three decades of graduate and Ph.D.—
programs in translations studies at universities all over the world (Lambert,
2017). Third: Linguistic translators select and apply various translation rules
based on rational professional suggestions of what is the best means to ren-
der a text in another language (Wilss, 1998). However, use of translation
rules can be based on other processes than rational calculations. Studies show
that habits and traditions of translations are also important, meaning histor-
ically and culturally embedded translation norms and styles. For example,
such habits are found in nation-specific translation styles (Duranti, 1998; Kit-
tel and Poltermann, 1998; Salama-Carr, 1998). Fourth: Although linguistic
translation has many rules and is a rule-based professional field, the rules
guide—but do not determine translators’ practices (Lörscher, 1991). Most
linguistic translation rules presuppose and allow much room for individ-
ual translators to interpret and make creative choices within the frames of
the rules. It is also stressed that competent linguistic translators should be
knowledgeable about a wide repertoire of translation rules, and be able to
switch between—and combine various rules to complete a translation task

(Krings, 1986).

Within the domain of Organizational translation there are numerous
studies reporting about how knowledge and practices are translated and
transformed while they are transferred (Sahlin and Wedlin, 2008; Haedicke,
2012; Monstadt and Schramm, 2017; Tracey et al., 2018; Nicolini et al.,
2019). However, with some few exceptions, scholars within this tradition
have not been concerned with questions of translation rules. One exception
is Sahlin- Andersson (1996). She studied the establishment of a research park
in Stockholm in the late 1980s, which was modeled on the successes of Sili-
con Valley, Route 128, and other well-known science parks in the U.K. and in
the United States. She found that the local translation in Stockholm of the sci-
ence parks success stories from abroad followed three types of editing rules.’
One was rules concerning contexts. Although the local translators referred to
other science park successes, they were distanced and not very knowledgeable
about the success-parks that they tried to model. By de-emphasizing and
decoupling the Stockholm-version from the details of the source contexts, the
translators had many degrees of freedom to make changes in—and adapt the
science park concept to the Stockholm context. The second type of rules iden-
tified by Sahlin- Andersson concerned the local formulation of the success of


150 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

the prototypes (the modeled foreign science parks). [he loca] translators des
matized the stories of the successes of the foreign science parks, While it made

the local stories more attractive and exiting to tell, - also transformed the real.
ities, leading to more edited and simplified — of the Prototypes, Th.
third type of translation rules concerned the overall rationalistic Plot of the
local Stockholm stories of the foreign prototypes. The successes of the Proto.
types were interpreted as resulting from initiatives taken by small Broups of
actors who had great ideas and who made decisions, planned, implemente,
and controlled the processes leading up to the successes. In reality, these local
plots were ex post rationalizations and simplifications of very complex ang

not at all straightforward processes. ; Hels
However, except for Sahlin-Anderssons contribution there are few, if any

attempts within the domain of organizational translation to research and
theorize about rules and regularities of translations. It probably reflects two
interconnected characteristics of this domain. The first is the axiomatic
notion of translations as processes that inevitably lead to transformations

of circulating representations of practices, and thus, to generation of new,
unique local versions. Translation processes are conceived of as complex

and hard to predict. They often involve many actors who interpret and put
their signatures on the actual object that is translated. Within this domain,

translations are frequently looked upon as a social mechanism which gen-
erates heterogeneity (Chandler and Hwang, 2015; Rovik 2016; Claus et al,

2021). To introduce a representation of a foreign practice and/or a circulating
idea in a new organizational context is, per definition “to construct it anew”

(Czarniawska and Sevön, 2005: 8). Translation is conceived of as a social
mechanism that makes it very hard—probably impossible—to reproduce
and copy practices and ideas. Thus, the strong notion among many schol-
ars within this domain of translation as a key heterogeneity-producing social
mechanism that, in principle, leads to unpredictable numbers and types of
new versions—does not correspond easily with a view of translations as rule-
based, regulated activities that settle in discernable patterns of actions and
outcomes,

The second reason for the absence of interest in translation rules and
regulations relates to the dominating research methods within the domain
of organizational translation. The strong notion of the complexities of
translation processes, and that they generate variance and heterogeneity,
have led to a preferred methodological strategy among many scholars within
this domain. It is to do qualitative studies of single (or few) cases, where
each translation process is mapped in detail and analyzed. However, this


if one can compare and analyze

and especially, if the samp |
å ' « P 9 m le
rocesses With different locations in time and space EN

å main pattern of translation outcomes

| hich h provide a possible route
back to the rules, which have generated the patterns, Obviously, such transla-

tions have many regularities and patterns. However, a main and most distinct
pattern comes to sight when numerous observations of knowledge transla-
ons are seen in comparison. The underlying pattern is that translations vary
between efforts to replicate, meaning to preserve, in principle, all details in the
source version in the translated target version—and efforts to adapt, meaning
to change the source version as much as necessary to make it fit into the target
organizational context. There are many studies of knowledge transfers that

capture attempts to replicate other organizations’ success formulas (Levitt,
1966; Winter and Szulanski, 2001; Winter et al., 2012), as well as studies

that show transformation and adaptation of transferred knowledge (West-
ney, 1987; Sahlin-Andersson 1996). These and other works—when seen in
comparison—are indications of the proclaimed overall pattern of knowledge

translation.
The replication-adaptation pattern stand out as a generic feature of trans-

lations in general. For example, it comes to expression in linguistic trans-
lation in two very strong and somehow competing translation ideals. One
is foreignizing, meaning metaphrase, or literal, sometimes word-by-word
translation—and the other is domestication, meaning adapting the source
text to fit the feature and the needs of the target context (Toury, 1978; 1980;
Venuti, 2017).

There is no doubt that replication—adaptation is a main translation pat-
tern, and further, that this pattern is generated and continuously regenerated
by translators who operate under the influence of some translation rules.
That such rules exists—and that there are difficulties and dilemmas involved
when they are applied—are reflected in knowledge transfer literature (Rovik,

2007; 2016; Posen and Martignoni, 2018), as well as the translation studies
literature (Westney and Piekkari, 2020).


152 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

Typologies as means of theorizing

In this chapter, I present a typology of tr anslation rules. Å ao Is a Meang
‘monious ordering of various phenomena. Within the Socia)
pce SEEN lassify and theorize about the occur
sciences, typologies are used to c assify a pinsen rence
and characteristics of a wide range of entities an activities— ased on thei,
key attributes. Among the classic social science pecan Durkheim;
four types of suicide (Moore, 2016), Marx's five basic types o society (Elliott
1978), and Weber’s rationality types (Kalberg, 1980). Typologies have also
been widely used in organization theory to generate parsimonious clasgjg.
cations and theories, for instance Etzioni's (1961) typology of reasons for
employees to comply with leaders, Miles and Snow’s (1978) types Of orga.
nizational adaptation, and Mintzberg's (1993) typology of Organizational
structures. There are numerous other typologies, too, such as Burns and
Stalker’s (1961), Blau and Scott's (1962), Porter's (1980), Foss's (2011), Rein.
hold et al’s (2019), and Sandberg and Alvesson's (2021). Typologies offer 4
framework for ordering of, and theorizing about, complex Organizational
phenomena, which, subsequently, can be used to explain and predict vari.
ance in outcomes of certain dependent variables (Doty and Glick, 1994),
The advances of typologies are widely acknowledged, for example as “ a key
way of organizing complex webs of cause-effect relationships into coherent
accounts” (Fiss, 2011: 393), as heuristic tools for researchers and practitioners
(Mintzberg, 1993), as means to simplify multiple causal relationships into a
few typified and easy-to-remember profiles (McPhee and Scott Poole, 2001),
and as “means to reduce information of complex ideal types—or real world
things—to those aspects of theoretical significance” (Bailey, 1994; 1),

A main critique against researchers who develop and apply typologies is
that they just classify, but do not theorize the organizational phenomenon
in focus (Blalock, 1969; Bacharach, 1989: Cornelissen, 2017), Typologists
are criticized for overemphasizing the description of the typology and cor-
respondingly for “underemphasizing on developing the underlying theory”
(Doty and Glick, 1994: 231). However, Doty and Glick (1994) argue that
typologies are, or at least, can be developed, to complex theories, but that they
are frequently misinterpreted. An important source to the view of typologies
as nontheoretical constructs is the confusing of typologies with taxonomies.
A taxonomy is a system of classification of entities into mutually exclusive
and exhaustive categories—based on explicated, consistent sorting rules. The
process of generating a taxonomy is typical bottom-up (Baden-Fuller and
Morgan, 2010), meaning that the classification is often exclusively derived
from empirical research and from observations. Typologies, on the other


Revealing the Rules of Knowledge Translation 153

nstructs presented as typologies
not typologies, According to Doty and
€ a typology, it must fulfill two claims.

| Ose one-sidedly emphasized viewpoints
into a unified analytical construct (Shils and Finch, 1997: 90). An ideal type

has empirical observations as its raw material, but it does not necessarily cor-

respond to any particular empirical entity and/or activity. Ideal types might
exist, but they are very rare, Compared to other ideal types, one particular

ideal type represents a unique combination of the dimensions that are used
to describe the whole set of idea] types in a certain typology.

Doty and Glick's (1994) second claim for a real typology, that is, a typol-
ogy that is also a theory, is that it should hypothesize relationships between
the types and one or more dependent variables. ‘Thus, the typologist should

suggest and argue for the similarity of an entity (such as an organization
and/or its members’ actions) to an ideal type—and scores on a depen-

dent variable. For example, Mintzberg (1979) made many predictions about
how certain organizations level of effectiveness—under various conditions—

could depend on the degree to which they resembled (or not) certain of his
structural ideal types.

A typology of translation rules

Based on insights about patterns of translation actions and outcomes and on
inspirations from salient features of the two foreign domains, a typology is
worked out—aiming at mapping and classifying the terrain of rules involved
in translation of knowledge across organizational borders. The terrain to be
mapped and typologized encompasses all kinds of translation rules applied in
knowledge transfers—such as broad, general rules as well as more specific—
and procedure-like rules. The typology also includes naturally (or culturally)
grown rules, which may come to expression in translation habits as well as

rationally constructed and explicitly formulated rules.


fer
154 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Trans

lation rules as containing franslatjo,,

les and operational rules of translation. The types in this Classification
eid s that the typology 1s based on empirical obserya_

are ideal types. It mean | |
tions of scansieiion practices and of various patterns that such translations
ions leading to replications versus translations lead.

ted. Translations | di
have genera n translation patter n providing routes back

| tations constitute a mal |
ing to adap that the translation rules portrayed in the

to the generating rules. However, | |
arien are ideal types means that certain aspects have been emphasized ang

cultivated through processes of sense-making. This means that the outlineg
ts and statements of categories of observations

types are abstract construc ) ; i
and that they cannot be “mapped backwards,’ that is, reduced to specific

observations (Priem and Butler, 2001).
The concept “translation mode’ is defined as a preferred way of trang.

lating across organizational borders, and which comes to expression in 4
recognized translation style. The typology contains three such ideal-typica]

modes—the reproducing mode, the modifying mode, and the radical mode
The translation modes are related to the main translation-outcome pattern

of replication-adaptation. The pattern represents various degrees of transfor-
mation of what is transferred—varying between low degree (replication) and

high degree (adaptation). Each translation mode is characterized by actor
inclination to prefer a certain level of transformation on the replication-

adaptation scale. Thus, the translation modes differ in the degree to which
their application may lead to transformation of what is transferred. Transla-
tion modes can be deliberately chosen—resembling a consciously decided

transfer/translation strategy. However, translation modes can also reflect
habits of translations—resembling what is known from translation stud-

ies where linguistic translation modes often co-varies with national borders

(Venuti, 1998; Ellis and Oakley-Brown, 2001).
Each translation mode is characterized by some appurtenant operational

translation rules. These rules come to expression in practical translation
actions. When they are used, they tend to have certain effects, meaning that

some lead translation outcomes in the direction of preserving the source
version of what is transferred, while others lead—to various degrees—to
transform it. The operational rules may be explicitly expressed. However,
more often they are informal and implicit (Røvik, 2016). As expressed by
Sahlin-Andersson (1996: 85), “they can often be deduced only indirectly,
meaning that they come to expression in practice, and can be traced ex post
the translation acts, that is, in how actors de facto conduct translations.

In this chapter, the typology of the translation rules is worked out.
Chapter 6 focuses on the relationship between the typologized rules and

The typology conceptualizes trans


Revealing the Rules of Knowledge Translation 155 |

t, I theorize about t
O what extent and how out-
comes of knowledge transfer processes can depend on the match between the

applied translation rules—and a defined set of specific conditional variables
that characterizes each knowledge transfer process

The reproducing translation mode

identify, preserve, and recreate in the translated target context version all

The underlying norm is one of recreating a source template with exacti-
tude in the target context. As stated above, the reproducing mode is an ideal
type, which means that it rarely occurs in its pure form in certain empiri-
cal counterparts. However, although an ideal type, it is possible to identify
certain societal entities and fields where the dominating translation style
in knowledge transfers resembles—and sometimes come very close—to the

reproducing mode. Clear echoes of the reproducing mode can be identified
in certain nations, cultures, and social movements.

Reproducing nations

Some nations as much more than others associated with a reproducing
translation mode. Undoubtedly, Japan is the prominent example—a nation
renowned for its propensity to imitation and copying others. The reproduc-
ing mode permeates the Japanese society—its wide reach can be traced in
both time and space within this nation. As to the history: Two of the very
first reports that depict the Japanese as devoted to mimicry focus both on an
incident in 1543 when a Portuguese trading vessel arrived on the Japanese
island of Tanegashina. Two independent reports of this early encounter
between Western and Asian cultures both describe how the Japanese—
after for the first time being exposed to guns, which were brought there
by the Portuguese—immediately tried to find out about the technology
and then started to make copies (Lidin, 2002). In 1556, 13 years after the
initial exposure, there were about 300,000 replica of the Portuguese guns in
Japan (Cox, 2007). From the first half of the eighteenth century there was
a rapid increase in the number of observations of Japanese mimeticism—
often reported in various explorers’ travelogues. For example, the German
naturalist, Engelbert Kaemper—in his book History of Japan (published


156 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

posthumously in 1727), notes from the city of Kyoto that "There ig Noth.

ing that a foreigner can bring that some ar ete oF other inhabitants or the
city will not undertake to ‘mitate” In the General History of Travel (1852) the

portrayal of the Japanese is even more stereotyped: “Although the Japanese

have invented almost nothing, when they put their hands . something, they
make it perfect” (cited in Lucken, 2016: 10). The Western image of the imi.

tative Japan was further strengthened throughout the nineteenth Century,
not least in the United States and as an effect on the public opinion by the

renowned Perry expedition. This was a U.S. government-initiated EXPedition
to Japan. It involved warships, which made two trips from the United Stateg

to Japan (1853 and 1854) with the aim of exploring and establishing diplo.
matic relations and to negotiate trade agreements between the two countries

The official widespread narrative from the Perry expedition portrayed Japan
as a nation of inhabitants with “a very characteristic inquisitive and imitative

disposition” (Rosenstone, 1980: 72). The notion of “copy-cat Japan” was also
put forward and confirmed by prominent nineteenth-century academics For
example, French sociologist, Gabriel Tarde, wrote in his influential work The

Law of Imitation (1890/1903) that the Japanese proved an important argu-
ment in his theory, in the sense that “the inferior” (Japan) usually imitated

“the superior” (the West). Although nuanced, the image of Japan asa repro-
ducing nation has been continued and even strengthened throughout the

twentieth century (Schwartz, 1996; Morris-Suzuki, 1994).
Shifting the angle from time to space: many observations indicate that a

reproducing mode and mimeticism permeate large parts of the Japanese soci-
ety. There are studies that document how the reproducing mode operates in
very different sectors and fields in Japan, such as in missionaries religious
practices (Curvelo, 2007), architecture (Coaldrake, 2007), public administra-

tive reforms (Westney, 1987), models and concepts of democracy (Howland,
2002), car industry (Madeley, 2007), and machine-tool industry (Chokki,
1986). There are also studies revealing strong influence of the reproducing
mode in various kinds of Japanese arts, such as poetry (Raud, 2007), painting
(Toby, 2007), and theater—and dance performance (Averbuch, 2007).
China is another country renowned for its inclination to reproduce and
copy others’ knowledge, practices, and products (Pang, 2008; Peng et al.
2017). The pervasiveness of this mode in the Chinese society has—likewise
in Japan—a long history and many expressions. One indication is the vol-
ume of the counterfeit industry, meaning the manufacturing of fakes or
unauthorized replicas of original branded products, About 86 percent of all
counterfeit products come from China and account for about 8 percent of

China's Gross Domestic Products (GDB), ‘The propensity to reproduce and


Revealing the Rules of Knowledge Translation 157

‘deal that promotes individuals to share their ideas and inventions with the

society. This ideal is clearly expressed in the Chinese tradition of Shanzhai

which refers to low-cost copycat versions of globally branded products sisch
as electronics, clothing, clocks, etc, (Chubb, 2015). Interestingly, the Shanzhai
institution of mass production of low-cost replicas is, largely, riot conceived of

as morally disgraceful acts. Rather, the production of good reproductions is
looked upon asa noble and challenging art. The ability to observe, memorize,
and reproduce with accuracy is also highly valued and promoted at all levels

(Page, 2019).

The typologized reproducing mode is an ideal type—which means that
there rarely are any empirical case that perfectly matches. Thus, although both
Japans and China's knowledge transfer practices obviously are strongly influ-
enced by a reproducing translation mode, their practices also deviate in cer-
tain respects from this ideal type. For example, China, although a renowned
copycat nation, has also fostered several game-changing inventions, among
them gunpowder and the compass. Correspondingly, there is a long West-
ern tradition for stereotyping Japan as an aping nation, lacking any inventing
capabilities (Schwartz, 1996). However, to understand Japan’s enormous
postwar industrial and economic success, one has to consider models that
account for much more complex relationships between reproducing and

invention efforts beyond simple copycat stereotypes (Morris-Suzuki, 1994).

Reproducing cultures

Representations of a reproducing translation mode can also be found within
certain cultures. Australian anthropologist R. Bowden studied the Kwoma
people, who live in a province of Papua New Guinea (Bowden, 1999). He
documented that the Kwoma’ rituals (e.g. dances) are continually imitated
and ritual objects duplicated. Admiration and high status are ascribed to
those who manage to make the most accurate imitations and replicas of
the culture’s ancestral prototypes. American anthropologist, G. Isaac (2011)
reports similar observations from studies of the Zuni, which is a tribe of
native Americans living in Western New Mexico. Correspondingly, to Bow-
den’s findings, Isaac shows how a reproducing mode permeates the Zuni
Peoples knowledge system. Unlike Euro-American main tradition, skills and
acts of repetition and replication are highly admired: “The duplication or


158 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

thing is viewed not as an alienating process that separate,

repetition of some ing of powerful knowledge as g Vita]

copies from originals, but as the reproduc
part of a cosmology (Isaac, 2011: 215).

The reproducing evidence movement

An example of a modern, contemporary representation of the reproducing
translation mode is the so-called evidence movement (Hansen and Rieper,

2009). The mission and aim of this highly scientized movement is tWofold:
to promote the production of evidence-based knowledge in various societa|
fields, and to facilitate the access to and transfer of evidenced best practices to

The start of the evidence movement is ascribed to the Scottish medical doce.
tor, Arcibald Cochrane (1909-1988), who in a seminal paper, published in
1972, criticized the medical science and profession for poor scientific quality
(Cochrane, 1972). Cochrane advocated much more use of randomized con-
trolled trials (RCT-studies) and comprehensive meta-studies to systematic

review and thereby enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of health services.
In 1993, his ideas materialized in the establishment of the Cochrane Database

for Systematic Reviews and The Campbell and Cochrane Collaboration. The

aim was to produce evidenced knowledge about whether and how certain
interventions work in practice, and thus, to foster more well-informed deci-

sions among health practitioners. Starting in the early 1990s in the medical
field, the efforts to produce evidenced knowledge by doing RCT-studies and
meta-studies have spread rapidly to other fields, such as education (Oakley
et al., 2005; Rovik and Pettersen, 2014), social welfare (Krejsler, 2013), and

criminology (Sherman, 2009).
Within the highly scientized evidence movement, research-based evidence

is conceived of as the most reliable type, that is, knowledge gained by syn-
thesized reviews of RCT-studies. Evidence can either refer to best practices
about implementation, meaning principles—with documented effects—for
how to implement and carry out a practice, or to affect evidence, which is
documented effects of certain interventions (Hansen, 2014).

Once evidenced knowledge has been gained, the challenge is to spread
it to the relevant groups of practitioners—and to secure that is reproduced
and practiced according to the recommended, evidenced standards. Thus,
the reproducing translation mode is widely recognized and acknowledged
within the evidence movement. The value ascribed to this translation mode


R
evealing the Rules of Knowledge Translation 159

ment) is implemented and practiced as prescribed. A fidelity scale | |
to measure the level of implementation of an evidenced iain et Th
aim is to preserve the components and the relationships No sn that
made the original practice effective—based on the view that it will affect the
degree to which it works in various recipient contexts. The core argument
is that making ally changes when transferring, iinplementin and å an
evidenced practice will reduce its effectiveness (Calsyn et al "197 7) Blakel
et al. (1987) formulated the rational premise for the preferred re minde;
mode in transfer of evidenced practices like this: “Innovations have a iad
ber of well-specified program components, Validated innovative programs
ape adapted with close correspondence (fidelity) to the original model”
(p. 225).

Chosen or taken for granted rules?

How can an “inclination to reproduce” be shaped? Sometimes it can be
rather deliberately chosen, and for several reasons. The first is reproduc-
tion and copying to enhance chances for increased efficiency. Innovations
are often laborious, risky, and costly, in contrast to imitations, which are
frequently cheaper and less risky. While innovators, as a rule, bear the devel-
opment costs, organizations acting in a reproducing mode, may wait to
imitate until a more robust prototype has been settled (Henry and Ponce,
2011), saving not only R&D costs, but sometimes also marketing and adver-
tising investments (Shenkar, 2010). Thus, in general, the reproducers—rather
than the innovators themselves—are those that reap the initial benefits from

innovations.
Secondly, a reproducing mode can be chosen based on knowledge of what

can be achieved by using it as a translation rule—more specifically, a cal-
culation that if one succeeds in accurately reproducing another successful
organization’s means, chances increases for also achieving the same suc-
cessful outcomes. The hamburger restaurant, McDonalds, is probably the
most well-known example of successful application of a replication strategy.
The prototype was developed in in the late 1940s when the two McDonald

brothers established their first hamburger restaurant in San Bernardino, and
developed an initial version of their fast-food concept referred to as Speedy
Service System (Schlosser, 2001). The McDonald brothers had established

similar hamburger restaurants units in the San Bernardino region. Then, in

160 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

the early 1950s, the brothers—with the help of Raymond Kroc, later known
as the American franchise tycoon, formulated and implemented the replica.

tion strategy, which implied that McDonald dn they were
located—should be exact replicas of each other (Anderson and Kroc 2018)
At the end of 2018, McDonald’s restaurants had spread to 120 countries and
counted 37,855 units, Together they served about 69 million customers each
day (Love and Miller, 1995). | | |

At the core of McDonald's replication strategy—which soon achieved the
status as the gold standard for franchise organizing in numerous branches
(Schlosser, 2001)—is the idea of developing and exercising very strict con.
trol of standardization and replication of all aspects of each McDonald unit,
including physical design, technology, work operations, service design, and
product types—and quality. Central in this strategy is also the idea of tight
surveillance and control with each franchiser unit, who, in principle, have
few if any degrees of freedom to make local adaptations and deviations from
the “copy exact” strategy.

However, a reproducing mode is not necessarily deliberately Chosen.
Rather, an inclination to reproduce may reflect specific traditions, cultures
and institutional arrangements in certain social entities, such as countries,
fields, organizations, etc., which functions as trajectories that lead actors into
a reproducing translation mode. For example, in Japan, the Propensity to
reproduce and copy partly reflects old traditions, such as the kata institution,
which strongly influences the learning of skills in various fields (Clarence-
Smith, 2007). Kata is a collection of norms for the relationships between
the master, who is authorized as especially knowledgeable in a field, and
the student/worker (learner) who is supposed to learn from the master, The
learner is urged to replicate with exactitude the master’s form, for example
in various kinds of arts. Only by replicating, can the learner later develop
his/her own style and become a master. Therefore, the accurate reproduction
is “an accomplishment highly valued in a Japanese view as the most appro-
priate method of acquiring artistic and other (such as technological) skills”
(Hendry, 2000: 179),

Likewise, the copycat nature of China reflects old Chinese institutions,
such as the above mentioned Confucian institution of Shanzhai, where skills
to imitation and reproducing exactly is conceived of as a noble art (Lam,
1995). Another cultural trajectory leading actors into a reproducing mode
in China is the Confucian-inspired and strongly politically and ideologically
supported notion that knowledge, ideas, and inventions are not individual
properties, but something that belongs to the collective, and thus, should be
copied and shared (Brander et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2017). There is a divide


setween Western nations and China in
Rights (IPR), and thus, about the extent |

are legal or not.
[n addition to culture and traditions

system honored and gave protection for those “first-to-invent” the Japanese
system favored and protected those ‘first-to-apply” the invention. Further

while U.S. patent applications and “ppurtenant materials are kept secret to
hinder competitors to steal the idea, the Japanese system was open, mean-
ing that the patent applicants’ materials were made available to votential
challenges and competitors (Melloan, 1988). Thus, the Japanese patent sys-
tem obviously favored a reproducing translation mode. Fidelity scales are
another example of an institutional arrangement that promotes reproduction
and copying. Such scales are both a symbol of the importance of accurate,
standardized distribution and application of scientifically gained and evi-
denced knowledge—and simultaneously an instrument for realizing such an
ambition.

Operational translation rule: Copying

Within the reproducing mode, copying is the main operational translation
rule. Copying refers to activities that aim at duplicating, making a similar,
or preferably an identical, version of a model conceived of as an original,
or a template. While copy exact, meaning the reproduction of an identical
version of the original, is challenging and rare, an ambition to copy may,
notwithstanding, often lead to very similar versions, as expressed in a fre-
quently referred definition: “A copy is which comes so near to the original as
to give every person seeing it the idea created by the original” (Justice Bailey,
1822, cited in Clarence-Smith, 2007: 52). In knowledge transfer, copying
refers to processes where an organization attempts to achieve a similar suc-
cessful effect than observed in a certain organization (a model) by replicating

and using similar means as the model.
There are many reasons why organizations may try to copy others with
as much accuracy as possible. For example, Winter et al. (2012) and their

study of a franchising organization documented that those units who most
accurately replicated the franchising template, were more successful and had

EEE EE

162 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

higher survival rates than those who were inaccurate copiers. There are also

many examples of high-profiled organizations re Vaud copying in their
knowledge transfer efforts. Rank Xeroxs knowledge transfer Policy in rela.
tion to their units in various country mer has been to claim an almost
100 percent accuracy in their implementation of headquarter's decisiong
for example about administrative routines and technological IMProvement,
(Jensen and Szulanski, 2004). Intel, the worlds largest manufacturer of PC
microprocessors, is renowned for its Copy EXACT strategy. Especially, i;
has materialized in routines to transfer new process technology from the
original laboratory environment into the ordinary manufacturing phage of
high-volume productivity (Iansiti, 1998; McDonald, 1998). The main reason
why many organizations cling to copying is the fear that even minor adap.
tations taken place in processes of translation between source context and
recipient context can have severe distorting effects on outcomes (Nelson and

Winter, 1982; Szulanski and Winter, 2002).
There is a long history, especially in Western countries, to conceive of

copying as a rather simple translation rule to execute and follow. There are
several reasons for that. One is the traditional Western image of copying as
not only simple, but also as a sign of low morale and of primitiveness. The

notion of the simplicity of copying reflects the strong position of the inven-
tion/innovation versus imitation-dichotomy in Western thinking. While
inventions and innovations are associated with creativity and hard work, imi-
tation is frequently interpreted as acts of relaxed repetition. There are also
images of copyists as actors of low moral who steal and take the revenues

from the laborious and creative inventors. In Western thinking, primitiveness
has also been ascribed to those who copy. For example, the Japanese" copying
skills have been compared to the behavior of monkeys and apes (Cox, 2007:
Toby, 2007), and referred to as “acts of Japanzees” (Schwartz, 1996- 368).
The image of copying as a simple translation rule has been strengthened
in step with technological innovations that facilitates the speedy making
of numerous copies of texts, pictures, physical objects and ideas (Clarence-
Smith, 2007). The combined effect of progress in digitization technology
(such as smartphones with cameras) and computing networking speed up
both copying activities as well as the diffusion of copies (Varian, 2005).
However, there is a divide between widely held images of copying as simple—
and insights from studies of knowledge transfer indicating that it is often
extremely difficult. The best indication of the complexities of copying is that
the overwhelming majority of attempts to replicate other organizations’ suc-
cesses fail (Szulanski and Winter, 2002). Why such a high failure rate of

_attempts to copy others’ best practices? Ironically, one important reason is

ae

SOP er. ge er mannen EEG ——


y of copying itself which may facil-
arted approach to the task of copying

process Where the learner commute in repe

template—discovering more and more det
these details into his/her copied versions.

Variations in the type and quality of the template is another challenge for
translators aiming at copying. In general, physical objects, like machines and
furniture, are easier to copy than work process practices, which often involves
complex relationships between many actors. Ideally, a template should be a

precise representation of the (best) practice targeted to be copied, and should
contain all relevant information that the translator need to make an accu-

rate copy (Winter and Szulanski, 2001). However, templates varies on these
points: Sometimes there are elusive links back to the practices to be copied,
information is general, while details are missing (Szulanski and Winter, 2002:
Baden-Fuller and Winter, 2005).

Translators access to the template is a third point that may facilitate or
hamper copying. ‘The iterative and laborious nature of copying requires good
access—such as in the Kata institution where the learner repeatedly can
observe all aspects of the master’s acts to be copied. However, translators’
access to templates are often limited, for example in cases where a potential
donor organization take efforts to protect their practice from being copied
(Reed and DeFillippi, 1990; Conner, 1995; Amara et al., 2008).

These arguments all run counter to the widely held images of copying
as a simple translation rule. In reality, copying is often extremely difficult.
According to Popper: “All the repetitions which we experience are approxi-
mate repetitions, and by saying that a repetition is approximate, I mean that
the repetition B of an event A is not identical with A, or indistinguishable
from A, but only more or less similar to A’ (Popper, 1959: 420).

ated cycles between observing the
ails—and subsequently translating

The radical translation mode

The second ideal-typical translation mode, the radical mode, is defined as
translators’ propensity to act relatively unbound by source context versions


164 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

ext versions of them (Rovik, 2016). Thus

99 Sous t ts p Under
de, translated” recipient-organization y

when creating recipient cont

the influence of the radical mo |
will tend to deviate severely from the source version.

The three translation modes outlined in this chapter are generic feature,
of translation in general. Thus, they are also clearly expressed in the two
foreign domains that are antecedents of the translation theory Outlined in
this book. In translation studies, the radical mode—often referred to a. the
norm of adherence to—and relevance of a translation for the target contex,
(Toury, 1985)—finds many expressions. For example, according to Cicero,
the ideal text translation should resemble “exprimere imitando> that is, the
artistic creation of something brand new in imitation of something that
already exists (Robinson, 1998b). The typical contemporary and influentia]
representations of the radical translation mode within linguistic translations
are the Manipulation School (Hermans, 1985/2014), and the Skopos theory
school (Hénig and Ku maul, 1982). In translation studies a radical trans.
lation mode is often referred to as adaptation, which means a translation
that is so radical that the recipient version is sometimes hardly accepted
as a translation (Bastin, 2008). In the domain of organizational transla-
tion, the radical translation mode comes to expression in the axiom that
translations always means transformations of what is transferred (Czarni.
awska and Sevon, 1996). The transformation can be severe, since translators
in different contexts interpret a source version differently, and thus, create
their own context-specific versions, paraphrased as everything everywhere,
yet everywhere different (Hannerz, 1996).

To better understand organizations and translators’ propensity to enter
into a radical translation mode in knowledge transfer processes, a set of why,
where, and how questions should be answered. There are three main tra-
jectories that may all lead translators to a radical translation mode. These
trajectories are constituted by rational calculations, accidents (or imitation

failures), and habitual behavior.

Calculated radical translations

A radical translation mode can be based on deliberate calculations and deci-
sions. Such decisions are often premised on two slightly different aims and
motives: the radical translation can be executed to (a) achieve effective local
problem-solving, and (b) to avoid risks of “foreign imports.”

nn ee a? ar

sl DEN IN ee FO ee ee, EEE Mon

Revealing the Rules of Knowledge Translation 165

changes to source versions of ideas and practices may be motivated by an
aim of developing even more effective and targeted means to handle certain
challenges in recipient organizations. Westney (1987)

‘1 her study of the development of the Japanese police system early in the
Meiji period 1868-1912. During the Meiji restauration, the police as well
as other parts of the Japanese public administration were reformed by sys-
tematic attempts to transfer models of institutions and practice from various
Western countries to Japan. The search for foreign models was premised on
a clear problem definition: the existing police system, which was a heritage
from the former Tokugawa regime (1603-1867), was characterized by con-
siderably differentiation of jurisdiction by region and by citizens’ status (one
law for noble Samurais, and another for commons), Therefore, the Meiji lead-
ers searched for a model that could secure a uniform treatment of citizens.

despite their status and localization. Although parts of the model were based
on insights from Germany and England, the Meiji leaders choose the French
centralized police system as the overall template to emulate.

However, in the early 1880s, it became clear that the centralized police sys-
tem imported from France had not solved the unreasonable variations in the
regional distribution of police services in Japan. Reports from the midst 1980s
documented a negligible police presence in the rural districts, and that the
French-inspired system of concentrating police posts in the towns restricted
the police to play a reactive rather than a preventive role in rural Japan.
This recognition sparked a radical transformation of important parts of the
adopted centralized French administrative model. Contrary to centraliza-
tion, decentralization now became the guiding idea for problem solving. As
Westney (1987) showed, this was a radically different strategy. Implemented
in the second half of the 1880s, it led to severe changes. From 1886 to 1889,
the number of police posts in the country made a jump of 270 percent. Police
stations were established in each county and a new type of base-level police
posts (one-man residential posts) was established under each county station.

Radical translation as risk avoidance. Differences between source and
recipient organizational contexts is a critical variable that affects chances
for successful knowledge transfer (Kedia and Bhagat, 1988; De Long and
Fahey, 2000). Important contextual differences often stem from spatial, cul-
tural, political, and institutional distance between source and recipient. The
more the source and the target contexts differs in relation to such vari-
ables, the higher the chances that the transferred foreign knowledge contains
context-specific elements that do not fit with the recipient context. How-
ever, recipient organizations can be aware of the risks involved in such
foreign knowledge imports, and may try to avoid or reduce the level of risk

provides an example


166 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

translations to adapt it to the recipient Organizatio,
late 1960s, a number of Norwegian organization. had
| f American performance-appraisa] s

by executing radical

An example: In the
YStems,

However, Norwegian leaders as well as representatives of the Norwegian
Confederation of Trade Unions (LO) and the Norwegian Confederation of
Business and Industry (NHO) early anticipated that the U-S.-Performance.
appraisal system contained elements from American working-life tradition.
and institutions, which were very different from the Norwegian Working. lif,

context. The overall feature of the U.S. system as a tool for individualizeg
top-down control of workers’ performance was anticipated to collide With

the Norwegian more collective and bottom-up-oriented tradition. In light
of such anticipations, LO and NHO initiated a radical translation of the
U.S. performance-appraisal system. The outcome, the so-called Developmen;
Dialogue, differed severely from the American system. For example, the dia.
logue between employer and employee should not focus upon the employees
work performance, results, and payments. Instead, the dialogue was designed
as a means to facilitate trusting relationships and to prevent conflicts in the

workplace.

Accidental radical translations

As showed above, radical translations can stem from rational calculations.
However, it may also be the unintended outcomes of failures, or “accidents?
in knowledge transfer processes. Especially, such “accidents” can Occur in
cases where organizations try to imitate others. The relationship between imi-
tation and innovation is tricky and fascinating. Researchers, such as Alchian
(1950) and Levitt (1966) have pointed at how failures to imitate may uninten-
tionally foster the creation of new versions that deviate so severely from the
source version that it stands out as something radically new. The main reason
why attempts at imitation may lead to radical translations is imperfect knowl-
edge in the imitation organizations about the source template to be imitated.

Westney (1987) provides an example from her study of the Meiji regime's

template. According to Westney, this radical deviation was largely caused by
poor Japanese knowledge of the French system. In fact, there were only one

person in the Meiji administration who possessed firsthand experience of the
French model.


Revealing the Rules of Knowledge Translation 167

Habitual radical translations

Habits and traditions—in addition to deliberate decisions and imperfect
imitations—are the third trajectory that can lead organizations and indi-
viduals into a radical translation mode. This means that the likelihood to

adopt this mode, expressed in the propensity to severely transform trans-
ferred source versions, sometimes reflect rule-like taken-for- granted values
and assumptions pertinent to certain societal contexts, While a reproduc-

ing mode is often especially ascribed to Asian countries and cultures, like
Japan and China, the inclination to enter into a radical translation mode
is associated with Western countries and ideals. Thus, the radical mode of
translation is facilitated by the Western modern project and some of its core
ideals: the belief in individualism and rationality, the value of newness and

novelty, and the notion of continuous progress toward higher levels of tech-
nological development, civilization and welfare. The heroes in this narrative
are those organizations and individuals who create inventions, take risks
and sparks innovations. The Western admiration for the value of novelty
and progress stimulates a radical translation mode—with its characteristic
severe changes and, thus, renewal of others’ knowledge and practices, The
Western celebration of newness, novelty, innovations, and inventors—often
contrasted with reproductions and copycats—is expressed in many forms, the
most prominent of which are discussed below.

The first is certain patterns in Western interpretations and production
of meaning about imitation versus innovation. There is a long Western
tradition to speak and write in disparaging terms about nations and organiza-
tions renowned for copying. The Australian anthropologist, Michael Taussig
(1993), points at a certain “foundational moment” (p. 75) which he argues is
an important antecedent of Westerners’ patronizing image of organizations
and individuals who copy as inferior and primitive. The background for this
historic moment was Charles Darwins voyage as a crewmember on the ship
HMS Beagle, which left England for South America in December 1831. In
1832, Beagle arrived at the archipelago of Tierra del Fuego. There, on the
beach, Darwin met the native people. In Darwins extensive notes from this
meeting, he described the natives as possessing “the power of mimicking' —
resembling apish humans (Darwin et al., 1839). He was especially fascinated
by their prowess to mimic himself. In his 1839 publication, Darwin made a
very important connection with historical consequences when he described
the natives’ copying behavior as expressions of a lesser, savage stage of civi-
lization. According to Taussig (1993), this was “the foundational moment in


,
168 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfe

the equation of savagery with mimesis” (Pp. 75)—which = ar Very instry
mental in shaping the Western image of ooppng aS acts 0 Primitiveneg,
Simultaneously, when painting the reproducing copycats as the black One;

novelty. Especially, since the early 1970s, nun! tn ves n B0Vernment,)
and regional organizations, as well as business rT ions, have invested
much money, competence, and efforts in designing an implementing Var.
ious incentive systems to promote inventions and innovations (Riggs and
von Hippel, 1994; Scotchmer, 2004). In addition to incentivizes Novelty
and innovation are also promoted by certain institutions (such ag g0vern.

mental patent offices), and by laws and regulations, especially Copyright ang

intellectual property rights. | |
The chronic shortage of novelty and rich supply of templates to imitate How.

ever, although novelty and inventions are admired and strongly Promoted,
they are usually extremely hard to achieve. This is indirectly reflected in the
definition of novelty as “something that was uncommon before a Particy-
lar point in time and that, hence, was discovered or created at that point
in time” (Witt, 2016: 3). As the definition implies, the concept of reg] nov-

elty is reserved for universal novelty, meaning that it must be an idea, o
device (invention), that is new at a particular time to all domains. Thus, acts

of discovery can, but usually do not, equate to novelty, since others usually
have discovered your “discovery” before. These arguments throw light on
why especially Western organizations and individuals experience that the

demand for novelty largely exceeds the supply. Organizations will try to over-
come the chronic shortage of novelty in various ways. Obviously, they can try
even harder to come up with real novelty and inventions. A few will SUC-

ceed, but real novelty is very scarce, and most organizations will have to
live up to the strong expectations of delivering novelty by other approaches.
Radical translation is a common approach. Many organizations will try to
construct newness and novelty by radically transformations of others’ ideas
and practices. While there is a chronic shortage of real novelty, there is usually
a rich supply of other organizations to imitate in whatever field and subject a
translator aims at making a novel contribution to. However, to live up to the
very strong Western norms of novelty deliverance, organizations will have to
transform what is borrowed so that the heritage from the imitated templates
is erased.
Radical translations as habitual acts forced by norms of avoiding copying
and producing ‘something new” can be done ina variety of ways. Renaming
others’ practices and devices, but keeping the content, is a common means

——

<—— Oe EE —


Revealing the Rules of Knowledge Translation 169

to signal Pee (Røvik, 1998), but hardly a radical translation. However,
there are other san radical types. One is to translate many rather modest
changes to a an ate, which together make the translated version deviate suf-
ficiently vom e imitated template to achieve the status of something novel.
The domain ; Aap music provides many examples—a domain with very
strict deman > Or novelty, and yet the very ubiquity of music makes it very
difficult for artists to avoid imitation. One example is the story of Elvis Pres-
leys first big hit, “That's All Right,’ which was recorded in Sun Studios,
Memphis July 5, 1954. This was also the day when Presley for the first time
met with two of the musicians who became permanent members of his band,
scotty Moore (electric guitar), and Bill Black (bass). “That’s All Right,’ was
the very first song they recorded. The song, and the way Presley performed
it, contributed strongly to his image as a very different artist of extreme qual-
ity. In 2004, the influential Rolling Stone magazine sealed the novelty status of
Presley's "That's All Right,” by proclaiming that it was “the very first rock-and-
roll record” (Cave, et al., 2004). However, while most fans experienced this
song as pure novelty, it was in fact a translation, although radical, of the black
blues singer Arthur Crudup’s song "That's All Right, Mama. which he wrote,
recorded, and released in September 1946. In Presley’s version, a series of
small changes added up to a radical translation. His version was significantly
more upbeat than Crudup’ original; Elvis changed parts of the lyrics, the
bass figure was different, and the blue notes were used differently. Together,
this created foreignness and newness compared to Crudup’s version. In addi-
tion, eight years had passed since Crudup released the original. Thus, to many
people in 1954, it was almost forgotten, or conceived of as old-fashioned.
Fashion and radical translation. Habitual radical translation reflects the
close connection between the logic of fashion and the Western modern
project, with its demand for newness and novelty and the corresponding
disparagement of imitation. Fashion is a dynamic social mechanism that
can explain how forms of human expression (ideas, practices, objects) can
achieve popularity, be massively spread within large populations, and decline
and fade (Tarde, 1903; Blumer, 1969; Rovik, 1996; Strang and Macey, 2001;
Czarniawska, 2014). Fashion's transient nature is closely interrelated with
the modern project's claim for progress and novelty. What drives fashion
is the continuous vacillation between two opposing forces: differentiation
and imitation. Novelty-seeking actors will try to differentiate from prevailing
fashions and attract attention—for example by radical translations. ‘This will
trigger processes of imitations and diffusion. When what formerly was novel
has been spread and become convention, it has lost its newness and novelty
quality—which again triggers differentiation and novelty-seeking processes.


fer
170 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Trans

Operational translation rule: Alteration

Within the radical mode, alteration 1s the operational translation rule. Alter.

ation refers to translation actions that leads to severe transformation of the

source version on the road to a target version. rare a alteration
can be initiated by deliberate decisions, be a byproduct of failures to imitate

or reflect habitual actions. There are many ways that the source template Can
be severely altered. However, analytically, two main types can be identifieg.

alteration as hybridization and as metamorphosis.
Hybridization. Alteration as hybridization refers to processes where trans.

lators select particular elements from various sources and combine them.—
thereby creating “something new” and different. The elements that are Com-

bined may come from different external sources: for example, a certain hybrid

with elements from existing practices in the target organization (Røvik 1998:
Bausch et al., 2022). A feature of many hybrid translations is that it is Often
possible to identify the identity of each particular element in the translated
version. For example, this was the case in the Meiji regime's chosen police SyS-

tem model. Even after this model was implemented, it was possible to identify
the antecedents of each element: The overall formal structure emulated from

France, the police education from Germany, and the English-style “patrols

drills, ranks and functions” (Westney, 1987: 38).
Metamorphosis. Alteration as metamorphosis means that the blending and

the change of various elements in the translated version is so thorough that
it is very hard to identify elements imitated from external sources. The devi.
ation from templates is profound and the transformation almost total. An
example is provided by the above-mentioned transformation of the US
performance appraisal system to the Scandinavian Development Dialogue.
This was a severe radical translation that comes close to metamorphosis,

The modifying translation mode

This mode, rooted in a pragmatic approach, is characterized by translators’
awareness of the value and the challenges of balancing competing concerns of
replications and adaptations, fidelity versus fit, in knowledge transfers across
organizational borders. Thus, the modifying mode comes to expression in
translation acts as a propensity to balance concerns regarding inclusion of
the essentials of the source practice to be emulated—with concerns about
making the translated version work in the recipient context (Rovik, 2016).


R |
evealing the Rules of Knowledge Translation 171

| y how a modifyin }
ee | g mode is used b
practitioners involved in concrete knowledge transfers, it is not—unlike the

two were ideal bt with a large distinct body of literature. In this
respect, it differs severely from the teproducing and the radical modes. Why?

While all the three modes are ideal types, th
, the two latter a :
with renowned knowledge transfer ideals, ne

| | of the Orient (the eastern part of
Asia). The narratives of these competing ideals for knowledge transfers have

been a strong driving force that have generated much attention, research
and literature about the reproducing and the radical translation modes. The

modifying mode introduced here, is much less conceptualized, discussed,
researched and described in the literature than the two others. It probably

reflects, that while the reproducing and the radical modes are two opposing
forces in the powerful narrative of how the West competes with the Orient,
the modifying mode is associated with a pragmatic, less exciting “on the
one hand, and on the other”—position. However, in the literature there
are, in fact, attempts to theorize and describe the modifying mode, and

what is more: The modifying mode is probably much more common among

practitioners involved in knowledge transfer processes than is reflected in
the research literature.

The modifying mode in the research literature

There are works within various research fields that try to define, theorize, and
highlight the advantages and challenges of balancing concerns for replication
with concerns for adaptations, or fidelity versus fit. For example, such reason-
ing is found within translation studies and to a large extent in works focusing
on equivalence models of translations, and especially in research following
the formulation of the so-called replication dilemma (Winter and Szulanski,
2001.

In translation studies there are enduring debates about how to ensure that
the meaning of source texts is present in the translated target version while it
is also sufficiently adapted to be comprehended by target context actors. The
translators are the key figures in such balancing acts. Pym (1992) argues that
equivalence between source and targets texts is a negotiable entity, and that

the translators are those doing the negotiation.


172 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfe

Most of the organizational research and re pe tO a mod
mode can be traced back to Winter heng — i å Soap lization
of the replication dilemma. A basic pr — På mn ine zulansk; IS that
there are great advantages of exactly replicating a source practice template

Thus, the norm should be copying. Yet, the dilemma that replicators face jg
that “they must trade off the advantages of precision against those of learn.

fying

ing and adaptation” (p. 737). The 2001 paper by Winter and Szulansk; jg not

in defense of a modifying mode. Rather, exact replication is still the Bold
standard while the replication dilemma ot då esented as the mechanism that
frequently leads transfer practices to deviate from what is optimal, How.
ever, in later works by these authors they are more eager to acknowledge the
rationality of a modifying mode and the advantages of balancing compet.
ing concerns of replication and adaptation. An example is Baden-Fuller and
Winter’s (2005) analysis of replicating strategies and their introduction of a
distinction between “principles” and “templates.” The templates approach,
meaning copy exact, is suggested by an order like “Watch me carefully how]
do this, then copy it exactly—but don’t ask me why” (p. 4). When Knowledge
transfer is guided by the principles approach, it may, according to Baden.
Fuller and Winter, be expressed like this: “Let me explain why this works and
the reasons why I do it this way, and then you try to make it work yourself I
will comment on any mistakes I see” (p. 4). Although the authors conceive of
both templates and principles as different means to succeed with replications,
the principle approach is more in line with a modifying mode, leaving more
autonomy to the target organization actors to interpret the template and to
adjust based on knowledge about the target context.

Williams (2007) takes a slightly different stand. He argues that organiza-
tions can overcome the replication dilemma by replicating some elements
in a template, and adapt others to fit into the recipient context. In a study
of cross-border knowledge transfer in the telecommunications industry, he
shows that elements such as accounting and reporting measures are fre-

quently replicated in transfers, because they are almost noncontext-sensitive
practices. However, other elements, such as customer service practices and
marketing, are frequently adapted because of “the extent to which they inter-
act with the unique environment of each location” (p. 868). Bauman et al.

healthcare field of prevention. They concluded—much in line with Williams
(2007)—that fidelity should be maintained at the level of each of the preven-
tion programs core causal mechanisms of operation. However, reinvention

of parts of a program to better fit into a target context, is permitted, but
only when the causal mechanisms is preserved. In a qualitative case study

ie Case rd kun Pe å kb ae ES

De Pe ee ee Dam Erland annan strid) )


Revealing the Rules of Knowledge Translation 173

fa multinational electronic organization, D'Adderio (2014) shows that the
replication—adaptation dilemma is solved in a way that corresponds to Cyert

and Mar ch’s (1963) theory of sequential attention to—and realization of goals
over time. She finds that the organization pays attentio

oint in time and then later shifts to attention towards
While we know that organizations do modify trans

has been less focus on how the modifications are done and how the
modified versions work in recipient organizations. Such shortages are the
point of departure in Ringov et al’s (2017) study of knowledge transfer in
2,025 units of a large U.S.-based franchise organization. In this project,
the researchers move away from a strict either-or conceptualization of
replication-adaptation, and studies the effects of replication of an established
template compared to the effects of augmentation, meaning versions of the
template where some elements have been added that are not part of the tem-
plate. Their empirical examination shows that both the cases of replication
and the cases of augmentation have positive effects on unit performance.

They also find that the positive performance effect of accurate replication

diminishes over time with unit age, while in contrast, the positive effect of
augmentation increases.

adaptation.
ferred practices, there

The operational translation rules of modifications

Although an intermediate modification mode is not at all as well concep-
tualized and highlighted in the research literature as the reproducing and
the innovation/radical translation modes, there are reasons to believe that
modifications are much more common in practice among actors involved
in border-crossing knowledge transfers. This suggestion is premised on two
main reasons. One is the well-documented insight that “copy exact” is very
difficult and that modifications—minor as well as more severe—may occur
accidently. Another is a suggestion that modifications of templates often
stem from deliberate decisions. Translators who are knowledgeable about
both the template and the recipient context may deliberately balance compet-
ing concerns for copying and adaptation by translating a modified version.

Within the modifying mode, we can analytically distinguish between two
main operational translation rules: omission and addition.

Omission

| “omissi | btraction, of
The translation rule “omission” refers to the toning down, or su

certain elements of the source context template in the translated recipient

DIO


174 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

| | ar | ree of omission between “ton;
version. There is a difference IT deg that the target cont Va down
5) «Toning down means pg Ntext Narratiy,

and “subtraction. | |
about the desired source practice suppresses ew aspects of it or tel] them
differently. “Subtraction” means that an identifiable element of the desireg

source-context practice throughout the translation process has been removed

and does not appear in the target context version.
* . . ?
What is left out in omissions, and why: There can be several reasons Why

certain details of a desired source practice have been excluded from — å
rewritten in the recipient-context narrative of the true story? Sometimes
certain aspects are toned down because they are untranslatable, Meaning that

hardly any equivalent for the certain source-context aspect can be found in
the recipient context. An example is provided by Sahlin-Andersson ( 1996)
in her study of attempts to establish a science park in southern Stockholm
in the 1980s—and with the Silicon Valley science park as a main template.

Two renowned aspects of Silicon Valley are the stable, very good, sunny
weather in this part of California, which attracts competent people from
all over the world, and the very special high-competence industrial Cluster,
which may nurture any firm in Silicon Valley. However, similar conditions
are not present in southern Stockholm. Thus, Sahlin-Andersson shows that
these two aspects were toned down in the Stockholmian narrative of the Sil.
icon Valley success story. What then happened to these two aspects can be
interpreted in light of a concept from translation studies, implicitation, mean.
ing the nonverbalization in the target version of aspects that are explicit in
the source version (Klaudy, 1998). Although toned down, it is reasonable
to think that almost all involved actors in the Stockholm project never-
theless knew about the extreme good weather conditions in California and
about the very special industrial and knowledge infrastructure in Silicon Val-
ley. Thus, these aspects became an implicit, not much mentioned part of
the Stockholmian narrative of the template. In general, actors with a strong
interest in realizing a project by recreating a special template may want to
highlight the similarities and suppress the dissimilarities when comparing
source and recipient contextual conditions. Thus, while similarities facilitate
border-crossing transfers, dissimilarities usually halt such transfers.
Sometimes translators concerned with making a recipient version subtract
certain elements that are part of the template to be transferred. It can be
accidently “lost in translation,’ but it can also be the outcome of calculated
actions. Organizations may leave out an element of a template because it is not
considered to be part of the core causal mechanism, and/or because it is antic-
ipated to be too laborious and costly to implement in relation to expected
returns. Walgenbach (1997) provides an example in a study of how a group of

bd . re he es Ts TS ect es a pbs de


Revealing the Rules of Knowledge Translation 175

an 1580-9000 quality standard with a number of highly specified elements
Data show that most firms made calculations about what they really

needed to control and enhance quality, thus leaving out elements that were
conceived of as not necessary. Elements from a source

are sometimes omitted based on anticipations that it has the potential to
release tensions and conflicts in the recipient context. An shal when the
U.S.-performance-appraisal system was attempted introduced in Norwegian
organizations in the late 1960s, most organizations made radical translation

altered the U.S. concept, and adopted the very different development dia-
logue. However, some organizations performed less radical modifications of
the U.S.-performance-appraisal system. Most of them modified the U.S. tem-
plate by leaving out the routine of determining parts of individual employees

salary based on evaluation of his/her working performance and results. This
subtraction was often based on anticipations of this routine’s potential to

collide with values and traditions in Norwegian working life (Røvik, 1998).

context template

Addition

The modifying translation rule “addition” refers to adding one or a few ele-
ments to the desired source version of a practice—to complete a recipient
version of it. The modifiers, meaning the added elements, can, in principle,
stem from three different contexts, that is, the source context, the recipient
context, and contexts outside the source and recipient contexts.

An added element to the recipient version may come from the source con-
text, in fact, sometimes from the source practice itself. The phenomenon is
known in translation studies as explicitation (Klaudy, 1998), meaning that an
element of the desired practice, which is implicit and taken for granted in
the source organizational context, can be made explicit and presented as a
necessary element in the translated recipient version of it. The reason may
be that what is taken for granted and tacit knowledge in one context, are
sometimes not known and as obvious in another context. An example: Rovik
(2007) studied how a practice in the health and care sector in a large Nor-
wegian municipality was translated and presented on an external conference
arena to other organizations which intended to use the actual practice as a

template to emulate themselves. It was a practice containing routines to coor-
dinate efforts across several specialized units within the health and care sector

to gain overall and more efficient services to citizens with combined needs for

services, In the presentation of the practice, the representatives of the munic-
ipality (the source) gave detailed descriptions of how the various units met


176 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

heir efforts. They also emphasized the Necessity of;
Nte

ciplinary identification and close mapping on beforehand of each in p
date to receive the coordinated service. However ha
ap.

s hardly mentioned in the internal municipality m

nd accomplish this practice. It was an obvious and a, for
an implicit, tacit part of the professionals’ practi, Aken fo,
on designated for potential adopters and recipients Yet in

and coordinated t
dis.

potential candi
ping element wa

how to organize a
granted element—

the translated versi |
explicated and added as an integral part of the successful practice It Wag

A translated practice can also be modified by adding elements from
CXist..

ing practices in the recipient organization—probably the most comm

of addition (Torsteinsen, 2006; Røvik, 2007). It can be an element v4 e

added because it works well, represent a repository of organizations! | Ich jg

edge and experience, and/or is suggested to be rather easily con Slows pi
With

the transferred desired source practice.
Sometimes the added element is brought in from contexts other th
an the

recipient and the main source context. Westney (1987) provides an

in her study of the Meiji regime's design of the Japanese postal s

the early 1870s. The Meiji leaders conceived of the postal system ystem in

Britain as the world’s most modern—and decided to emulate in ee a
entirety

in the establishment of the Japanese postal system. However, there w

tain feature of the British postal system that was hard to translat oe

the British railroad system, which was the backbone of the U.K mr
tN. POSTA Sys-

tem. While Great Britain was largely urbanized around 1870
world's best railroad system, 80 percent of the Japanese sinket 7 = 2
om areas, and the railroad system was poorly developed. Thus du ae
oe å ere ge find solutions to postal transportation, One aa
EN . “ O EE transportation technology, the md
apy tim a e rickshaw The first rickshaws appeared in Japan
ender y ere immediately adapted to fit the challenge of
portation, especially in urban areas. Within a year, there md

Chinese-inspired ri
ckshaws serving in :
th er
Japanese postal system, B e mainly Great Britain-inspired

Summing up

The aim of this c |
of translation jade å Deen to identify, describe, and analyze the rules
The chapter has develo — Knowledge across organizational borders.
prises three main tesla NSypsogy: 06 trapslelloervuken; wilelt 000
translation rules. Fi on modes—each with appurtenant operational
igure 5.1 sums up the main insights from this work.


paje}a1 aie Å34] Mou pue $S)da2u0d Aay :sajni uonejsues JO Adojod v T’s aunsiz

138re) © ut pi ayeoydas 0) sjdmdye wos Funpsas 21ND ed a2anos pansap

"uonerzuråio
E 01 Iprur SUONPIYTPOWI JEUONU3JUTUN are SUOHNEIHTPOW JEJUIPNIV

1 JO} $U123U0> YIM aye] dura] 2INDEId 354NOS sy) SPIEMO) ÅJTJAPY JO}

"uoneziutåio j3$1e] 34) UTYTIM
$u135u0> Junaduro> a>ur[eq 0) AQ 0}—AjIpoul 0) SUOISPep 31 LI3QIP(

SNOLLVITSNVEL DNIAJIGON O.L DNIGVAT SANOLOAVAL

‘sao eid put seap! PIJEJIU 0} saSuey> 313A3$ JYEUI O} UONLUTDU!
UT pur SUONEJSUEN |EDIPEI SJJEJNUUINS *, sjEDÅd0D, pur SUONEJIUI SPIEMO]
sapmme Furpua>sapuo> Surpuodsaxs0> 34] pur ‘ssaisoid pur ‘ssaumau

ÅJ[2AOU JOY UONENWIPE LIRISIM IY |, > UOHEJSUET [EDIPEI yeayiqeyy

—7M)"C020 —————0

"UOISJJA

254nOS dy] WO JIELLIP ÅJJEIIPEI JEY] SUOISIAA JaBIE} JO JIUISISUTD IY] 0}
pea] Ayjeuonuajuron pur 2INPEId 224nos ary JO J8p>|MOUY Jood uo paseq
are JEU 0) sjdmane Ways SI PM "UONEJSUEI) [EDIPEI [EYWIPPOy

—————_—_—_————

"Tx9] 09 JUIdD31

34) Ul YIOM JI AYU 0) JY WIMNMUIXCW 4335 OJ pue syodun >jeuudosddeur
uS1210j JO SYSLI ploak 0)—JEJSUEN ÅJPEDIPeI 0] SUOISPIP 31 EIIIPG

SNOLLVISNVUL TVDIGVA OL DNIGVAT SANRIO. LOALVAL

34) 9-3) suonrpen yeuoNeU pur *'sjuaw3BueLr [EUONNINSU! 'saIM[NI

— «uonrpe.n reyzueys as2u1y>) oy} pue UonNrpen rjEN asouvde/
synods dq payenppe 33npouda1 0] uoRHEUrpPu] :Furmopjoy apnI [PNIIGEH

EEE

"2504nos dU Ul Se Saya JANISOd
SWIRS dU] SULASIYIE JO SJJULYD IY) PSEIIOU! O} PUL S}SOD qusuidojaaap
JU} PIOAR 01 SUONU3AUI $J3YJ0 3JEDN das 0} SUOISPaP 3JEIIGIPA

SNOLLVISNV&L DNIONGOUdAU OL DNIGVAT SATIOLIYVUL

SAPOLDASVL

11 JO UOTSIAA JUIIdIDIJ JY] UT UOISJJA IDINOS PIISIP Iq] OJ
PaPpt av SJUDWIJP MI] B JO JUO 3J2YM Se UONPFISUEIL :NOLLIGAV

"UOTSJJA J2ØIE] JY} UT UOISIAA IDINOS JY] JO SJUIUIIJ>
UTI) JJLIIQNS JO/PUB UMOP 3U0] 0] SJJP UONPISUEIL, :NOISSINO

— —

"UOISJAA JOSIE}

yuasayip ÅJ9)9[duod & OFUT UOISJJA
221m0s B Jo aBuey> YSnos0yY
V*SISOHAYUONVLIN

"UOISJJA JOSIE] B O} POI
34] UO WOISIAA 354NOS dt}
JO SUONPULIOJSUEI] 213A2S
0) pes] JER Spe DONTJSUEL,
*NOLIVYYALTV

‘MOU Furyjauos ojur WAY)
JUIGWIOD PUP $32INOS SNOLIBA

WO $JUJUIAJ> JEJNINIEÅ JI9[35
SJOJEJSUEIL NOLIVZIGRIGAH
warp

NOLLVUYLTV JO STIAFT OM L

“UOTEZIULBIO jafre) & UI JNIEId 3501NOS PaLIsap E

STINI NOLLVISNVUL TYVNOLLIVUYdO

131005 1u>irdras

34] Ut YOM UOISIJA Poyejsueyy
au] Furyeur ynoge su130U02
ULM PajEJNUId aq OJ JIHDLId
301nNOs 3} JO SJENUISSI IYJ JO
UOIST DU! JO} SUIIJU0> 30UPJEG
03 Aysusdoid ay I,

AGOW ONIAIGOW

"UOISJJA
JDINOS IY] WOT ÅPJIAIS IJEIAIP
og PU 22020003 (PAM
JO SUOTSIAA P3J UOD JUIIdÅIDIL
Sunea1d udyYm SUOISIAA JXIJUOD

a21nos Aq punoqun ÅJ2Ane PI
pe 01 Åpsuadosd ay I

HGOW TVYDIGVY

"sorpeud 34] JO UOISJIA
323JNOS DY} Ul JSND Ady] se *'WIY]

usamjeq sdrysuonepR ay} pue
*UOISJAA paye|suey YR Ul Ion IeId
JO SJUSWIIP [Je BeaNes
og Äpsuddoud ay I,

FaOW DNIDNAOUdTE

SAAON NOLLVISNVUL


6
Reimagining That Translators

and Translations Make a Difference

Introduction

This chapter returns to the puzzles that sparked this book project: the numer.
ous observations of variations in outcomes following attempts to transfer

knowledge across organizational borders. Knowledge transfer successes and
failures have many expressions and often have severe consequences, includ.
ing quality of services and products, financial return, and for organizational
competitiveness, growth, decline, reputation, and even survival. How can
such variations be interpreted and explained? ‘This is the central question
that permeates and connects all parts of the book. Knowledge transfer schol-

ars have gained insights into this question through identifying and studying
the effects of various transfer barriers and enablers. Partly in contrast to

the barrier approach—but mostly as a supplement to it—this chapter devel.
ops the translation approach to understanding and explaining variations
in knowledge transfer processes and outcomes. This is done by elaborat.
ing the third key argument upon which the translation theory is founded;
that is, that translators and their translations make a difference: The ways

translations are performed may explain outcomes of knowledge transfer

processes.

The barrier approach

The last three decades of knowledge transfer research have materialized in
an extensive body of literature on the topic. Although the literature reflects
a multitude of perspectives, theories, and findings, it also has much in com-
mon. For example, the signal transmission metaphor (Shannon and Weaver
1949; Lin et al., 2005) is an underlying model that most of these studies
are framed within. The heritage from this model comes to expression in the
positioning of knowledge transfer studies with such key concepts as source

A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer Kjell Arne Ravik, Oxford University Press, © Kjell Arne Ravik (2023).
VOI; 10.1093/050/9780198832362.003.0006

——
——g


Reimagining That Translators and Translations Make a Difference 179

sender)» channels, information (message), noise, and recipient. However
despite being ae by this metaphor, these studies show how the
-omplexities of Knowledge transfer processes across organizational borders

deviate drastically from simple signal transmission models. Thus, another
-ommon characteristic of this literature is the identification and sister of
factors—0T barriers—that complicate signal transmission images of knowl-
edge transfers. A barrier is a hindrance that makes it difficult or impossible for
something to happen. The barrier stops or decelerates the movement of some-
thing, thus maintaining separation. A barrier can be concrete, such as a fence

that hinders passage between certain geographical areas. Within the field of
knowledge transfer studies, a “barrier” is an abstract concept that serves to
zoom in on any obstacles that stops or slows down the flow of information
between organizations and/or between units within organizations. An often
used synonym for barrier is the concept of boundary (Brown and Duguid,
2001; Carlile, 2004). Several knowledge transfer scholars explicitly refer to
their research efforts as attempts to identify and measure the effects of certain
transfer barriers. One of the first to introduce the barrier concepts was Szu-
lanski, in his seminal 1996 paper, which subsequently appeared as a defining
concept in knowledge transfer research and publications (Argote et al., 2000;
Sun and Scott, 2005; Minbaeva, 2007; Riege, 2007; Schilling and Kluge, 2009;
Paulin and Suneson, 2015).

Von Hippel (1994) introduced the concept of “sticky information,’ which is
closely related to the concept of barriers. It includes all barriers and challenges
that mediators may encounter when trying to decontextualize knowledge
from a source organization, then transfer and contextualize it in a recipi-
ent organization. In subsequent literature, “stickiness” has been used almost
as a synonym to barrier (Szulanski, 1996; 2000; Jensen and Szulanski, 2004;
Li and Hsieh, 2009; Blackman and Benson, 2012; Karabag and Berggren,

2017).
The factors that knowledge transfer scholars have identified as barriers can

also act as windows into understanding what enables knowledge transfer pro-
cesses. For example, while certain features of social networks that connect
source and recipient may decelerate, other network features may accelerate
knowledge transfers. Thus, barriers identified in knowledge transfer studies
are probably better conceived of as variables, where certain value scores hin-
der and others promote knowledge transfer across organizational borders. In

this way, variations in outcomes of knowledge transfer processes—whether
successes or failures—are supposed to stem from different scores on certain

barrier variables.


180 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

Chapter 2 identifies seven different bodies of literature, each ONCentra,
ing on theorizing and researching a certain set of factors, or Variables tha
are supposed to influence upon knowledge transfer across an BANIZation)
borders. Below is a short version of each of these research traditiong key the.

barring/facilitating effect on knowledge tr anster pr ne and OUtComeg

Formal organizational structure. The unifying theoretical Assumption r
that formal organizational structure is a central independent variable thay
channels, sometimes determines—and thus, can be the source of Variations

in border-crossing knowledge transfer processes and outcomes,

Absorptive capacity. The key variable, absorptive capacity, refers to the abil.
ity of an organization to recognize the value of new, external information,
assimilate it, and exploit it for commercial ends. It is supposed that recip.
ient organizations’ level of absorptive capacity is decisive for Variations jn
knowledge transfer processes and outcomes.

Social networks. The unifying theoretical assumption is that social net-

works within and between organizations—and the actors’ position Within
them—can be decisive for variations in knowledge transfer processes, Thus,

the central independent variable with barring/facilitation effect On trans-
fers is features of the social network, such as network position, tie Strength,
density, and connectedness.

Geographical distance. The unifying theoretical assumption is that physical
distance between organizations and individuals can affect and be the source

of variations in knowledge transfer processes.

Cultural distance. The central assumption is that the degree of similar-
ity/dissimilarity between organizational units’ culture and/or nations’ culture
(that is, the common norms, behaviors, beliefs, customs and values shared by
a defined group of people) is likely to influence—either barring or facilitate—
and thus, be the source of variations in border-crossing knowledge transfers
processes,

Institutional distance. Similarities and differences between countries’ insti-
tutional profiles (that is, the typical features of a countrys regulative, cogni-
tive, and normative institutions) can be the source of variations in a variety
of processes across national borders—including knowledge transfer pro-
cesses. The central independent variable with barring/facilitating effect is
country-specific institutional profiles,

Knowledge characteristics. The central assumption is that certain proper-
ties of the knowledge to be transferred, especially whether it is ambiguous
or not (tacit and uncodified versus explicit and codified), will influence its
transferability across organizational borders


Reimagining That Translators and Translations Make a Difference 181

rhe translation approach

The seven streams of research and literature that constitute the barrier
approach have identified oan of factors that influence knowledge transfers
and have documented their effects. This research has greatly advanced the
understanding of what causes variations in knowledge flows between orga-
nizations. However, the identified barriers only account for limited portions
of the actual variations in knowledge transfers processes and outcomes. For
more than three decades, knowledge transfer scholars have traced an even-
ual X factor that can hopefully explain most of the variations. For example, a
lot of hope and enthusiasm was attributed to absorptive capacity, which long
held the status as the potential X factor. However, both the indistinctiveness
of the concept (Lane et al., 2006; Duchek, 2013) and results from empirical
studies (Szulanski, 1996; van Wijk et al., 2008) have led to reduced optimism
regarding the explanatory potential of this variable too. Thus, an X factor has
not yet been identified, and a lot of variation remains to be understood and
explained regarding knowledge transfer processes and outcomes.

A translation theory approach may be a supplement that pushes under-
standing of causes of such variations a bit further. However, a translation
approach does not mean introducing another potential barrier variable to be
theorized and empirically tested. Instead, a central element in this approach
is methodological advice to zoom in on actors involved in knowledge trans-
fers and trace what they really do throughout such processes. A key concept
in this approach is translation performance, which means the extent to which
and how involved actors—the translators—gain knowledge about source and
target contexts, and mobilize such knowledge to choose, use, and eventually
combine and shift various translation rules throughout knowledge transfer
processes. A central suggestion is that the involved actors’ translation perfor-
mance may be decisive for the processes and outcomes of knowledge transfers
between organizations. Thus, studies of translation performance can be a
key to improved understanding of the generation of variations in knowledge
transfers,

From a barrier approach perspective, the suggestion to study actors’ trans-
lation performance may be considered unnecessary because it will probably
show what we already know from barrier studies. However, as stated above,
many variations remain in knowledge transfers that the barrier research
has not yet accounted for, The suggestion is that these unexplained varia-
tions stem, on one hand, from instances where translators are not stopped
or hindered by barriers known from the research literature, and, on the
other hand, from instances where translators fail to exploit factors identified

182 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

in the barrier research as enablers—to make GN knowledge trang.
fers, In other words, translators have the potential to successfully ove,
=F ! ell as to contribute to failures in Situine:
stickiness and barriers, as W enig | Uationg
where barriers are modest or absent. This is an important source of Varia.
tions in knowledge transfer processes an d on oe and also of var lations
that—when seen from a barrier approach perspective—are not EXPected and
accounted for.

The theorizing of translation performance as a key to understanding the
emergence of and variations in knowledge transfer processes and Outcomes
has methodological implications. It requires the researchers to ZOOM in
on translation processes—both decontextualization and contextualization
processes—and on the involved actors and their translation actions The
dynamics of such processes must be revealed, which means exploring how
involved actors choose and use various translation rules and encounter and
enact various translation challenges.

The reviewed seven research traditions, all of which study various transfer
barriers, have certain limitations as sources to insights about the dynamics of
translation processes and actors’ translation performances. The limitations
stem from the dominant method of identifying transfer barriers and enablers,
which is large sample studies and quantitative data. This methodological
approach often means less attention to the transfer processes and less focus
on the roles of the involved actors. Most of the foundational and most-cited
works within each of these traditions are quantitative large-sample studies
These studies are designed primarily to identify the effects of sets of theo-
rized barriers and enablers. However, they are not founded on theorizations
of the involved actors as translators and of the importance of their transla-
tion performances for outcomes of knowledge transfer processes. Thus, many
studies of transfer barriers indirectly create an image of involved actors as car-
riers or transporters—that is, passive mediators of knowledge—rather than
as active translators who themselves make differences in transfer processes

and outcomes.

When translators make a difference

Å key argument in the translation approach is that the translation rules that
the involved actors apply—whether the reproducing, modifying, or radical
mode and their appurtenant operational rules—can be decisive for outcomes
of knowledge transfer processes. This implies that the translators’ usage of
rules is important for outcomes. As highlighted in Chapter 5, translation rules
are sometimes chosen deliberately based on rational calculations. However,


Reimagining That Translators and Translations Make a Difference 183

rather than premised on rational calculations, such “choices” sometimes
reflect culturally defined norms, values, and habits. Anyway, the appropriate-

ness of a translation rule depends on the extent to which the rule matches in
relation to what should be achieved in which contexts and under which con-

ditions. A translation rule applied under different conditions is likely to lead
to different results. Thus, a challenge for the translator is to carefully assess
the aims of the actual knowledge transfer and its context and conditions—
and then apply one or more translation rules that seem to be appropriate.
Such challenges that are pertinent to actors’ translation performance—and
how they are handled—are a main source of variations, meaning the extent
to which translations lead to intended and desirable versus unintended and
undesirable outcomes. Translators sometimes succeed in assessing the sit-
uation and then choose and apply appropriate, matching translation rules,
which leads to intended and desirable results. However, sometimes transla-
tors fail, and for various reasons. Their assessment and knowledge of the con-
texts and the actual situation may be superficial and poor, they may choose
inappropriate translation rules, and they sometimes can be slow learners who
maintain the usage of inappropriate translation rules for too long.

The next three sections present sets of example cases to illustrate how trans-
lators and the way they use certain translation rules have consequences for
outcomes. The examples show how translation performance may be decisive
for successes as well as failures. The six transfer cases take place in differ-

ent time and spatial contexts: the United States, Norway, Denmark, China,
United Kingdom, and India.

Reproducing mode: Successes and failures

The role of involved actors and their translation performance can be decisive
for whether organizations succeed or fail in applying a reproducing-copying
translation rule. Translators can be instrumental in choosing and using copy-
ing in such ways that it leads to desirable outcomes. However, involved
actors’ translation performance may also be the reason why attempts to
copy lead to failures and undesirable outcomes. Critical variables for out-
comes are the translators’ assessments of the situations that lead to the choice
of a reproducing-copying translation rule, and their decisions and actions
that follow such a choice. Two examples are provided of the usage of a
reproducing-copying translation mode; one with a successful, desirable out-
come and another that failed and led to an undesirable outcome. In both
cases the processes and outcomes cannot be understood without taking the

involved actors’ translation performances into account.

OS ee OE

ee aa —


184 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

The McDonald's copying case

McDonald's is the world's largest fast-food chain and one of the Dest-know,
organizational replication successes. The chains almost identical estaurant,
are spread all over the world and offer—with some exceptions—the Same
basic menu with the same taste and quality everywhere. The United States
alone has approximately 14,000 outlets. More than nat of the US. Population
live within a three-minute drive from a McDonalds restaurant (Tillotson
2008). About 8 percent of the U.S. population—20 million people—vicit ,

McDonald’s restaurant each day, and the chain sells three times aS much
food as Burger King, the second-largest chain. The first international McDon.

ald's franchise opened in 1967 (British Columbia). Today, there are 30,000

locations of McDonald’s restaurants in 118 countries.
However, back in 1954 when McDonalds was established, it was not at all

obvious that it would be a success. McDonald’s was soon organized accord.
ing to franchising principles, meaning a continuing relationship between a
franchisor and a varying number of franchisees. It is an organizational form

where the owner (the franchisor) allows the franchisees to operate under a
common brand and to produce and distribute the franchisor’s product, ser.

vice, and method in accordance with more or less detailed specifications set

by the franchisor. Franchising was not new in the early 1950s. Several fast-
food companies had already tried to make replicas of their core businesses by
franchising, but with limited success. So why did McDonald’s succeed with

its replication strategy?
The McDonalds fast-food replication success cannot be understood with-

out zooming in on the translation performance of Ray Kroc, who in the early
1950s was the U.S. national sales manager for Multimix milkshake machines,
In 1954, he visited Mac and Dick McDonald’s hamburger restaurant in San
Bernardino to find out why they had ordered as many as five milkshake
machines. Kroc was impressed by the brothers’ clean, effective, and quick
serving of a limited menu of inexpensive and delicious hamburgers. He had
realized the demand for high-quality fast food that could be made easily
available for the increasing portion of mobile Americans who wanted to eat
out. Thus, the McDonald brothers’ restaurant in San Bernardino became an
important template for Kroc’s replicating strategy. While designing his repli-
cas, Kroc also learned from contemporary fast-food franchising failures. One
such failure, he thought, was to rapidly sell out franchises, generate money,
and grow fast—but simultaneously lose oversight and control with the fran-
chisees. According to Kroc, another typical franchisor failure was to devote
too little attention to the key product: the food and the standardization of

EN PP GN

Reimagining That Translators and Translations Make a Difference 185

, high-quality menu (Kroc and Andersson, 1987
jon strategy was developing,

ict copy exact modus operandi from
furniture, uniforms, menu, and

in ailed attempts of contemporary
fast-food franchising, into his replicating strategy, can be recognized by three

characteristic strategic translation actions.

The first was that he avoided the common practice in the 1950s of sell-

ing territorial franchises, Which is where the franchisor sells the franchisee
the exclusive right to serve a defined territory without competition from
other franchisees. Unfortunately, territorial franchises often led to barriers
between the franchisor and the territory-ruling franchisee, which came to
expression in a loss of control for the franchisor and to local adaptations and
deviations from the actual franchising standards (Kunkel and Berry, 1968;
Chiou and Droge, 2015). An example stems from McDonald’s main competi-
tor, Burger King Corporation (BKC). In 1959, BKC purchased defined rights
for many territorial franchises in the United States and grew rapidly (Chiou
and Droge, 2015). However, BKC lost control in the territories, which led
to lowered and varying food quality and to inconsistency across franchises
and territories. BKC had a hard job throughout the 1960s re-establishing
standard fidelity among the franchisees. By contrast, even in the early 1950s,
Kroc was aware of the potential negative effects of territorial franchises (Kroc
and Andersson, 1987). Therefore, he concentrated solely on single-store fran-
chisees, who had to compete with each other without any agreement about
exclusive territory control. With reference to the barrier approach, this illus-
trates how Kroc, through his persistent and proactive translation based on
the reproducing mode, managed to overcome the potential barring effect of
territorial franchising, which could lead to franchisor’s loss of control and
increased franchisees’ autonomy to make local adaptations to features of their
territories.

The second characteristic of Kroc’s translation performance refers to how
he worked with potential new franchisees and, thus, replicas of McDonalds.
Unlike most fast-food competitors, which sold new franchises rapidly, and
consequently grew quickly, the entrance process for new McDonald s fran-
chises was thorough and time-consuming. This reflected Krocs ambition to
ensure that each new candidate was knowledgeable about and motivated to
fully implement and live up to all McDonald’s standardizing requirements.

— =- ær SO eS ee eee og ee ee ae ee ee — —— -

186 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

in terms of recruiting the most able and deg

‘cated franchises. In addition, Kroc wanted to ee in Franchisee as
partners. He established a system of economic wr ives, where he plac, 4
the economic health of each franchisee first. Krocs e = a select the Most
knowledgeable and dedicated applicants and to Incentivize them by eco.
nomic means can be interpreted in light of insights from barrier approach
scholars about the importance of absorptive capacity in knowledge trans.
fers. In the actual context, absorptive capacity refers to the franchiseg abil.
ity to recognize, understand, adopt, and routinely apply McDonald's rigid
standards for a uniform fast-food chain. Through proactive translation per.
formance Kroc secured a higher absorptive capacity by only letting in the
most knowledgeable and dedicated candidates, and by stimulating Increasing
absorptive capacity through economic incentives.

The third central feature of Kroc’s translation was his continuing effort,
to maintain system-wide uniformity and consistency throughout the chain,
Kroc opposed the typical Western image of a replication strategy as easy to
implement and apply. He stressed the challenges of not only choosing such
a strategy, but also adhering to it and maintaining it over time (Kroc and
Andersson, 1987; Brunsson and Jacobsson, 2000). He used various means

to protect the standards and the replica franchising units from local adap-
tations and deviations. All day-to-day operations in a McDonald’s franchise

unit were broken down into single easy-to-learn operations. These operations
were codified and described in detail in the McDonalds 700-page operation
manual (Tillotson, 2008). As early as the mid-1950s Kroc implemented a
system for continuously rigid monitoring and control of franchisees’ perfor-

mances according to McDonalds’ standards and procedures.
The McDonald's example above shows how translators can make a dif.

ference in knowledge transfers. In order to understand McDonald’s success
with its fast food-replication strategy, one must zoom in on the knowledge
transfer process and trace how a certain translator’s performance established
very important premises for the success through deliberately choosing and
maintaining an appropriate translation rule.

Thus, the process was effective

Why Taylorism in the U.K. mines failed

Numerous attempts to use a reproducing-copying translation rule in knowl-
edge transfer fail. Such failures can often be traced back to shortcomings of
the involved actors’ translation performance. For example, translators may
not fully understand the source practice and therefore make inaccurate copies


geimagining That Translators and Translations Make a Difference 187

{chia 1950). Another typical failure is that the translators do not manage
v"intain the reproducing-copying strategy and allow contextual adap-

o mal lace, as was the |
to take place, case with Burger King (mentioned above)

ses illustrate that copying others’ ideas and practices is challenging
r, failures following from the use of a teproducing-copying transla-
le sometimes reflect that the chosen rule was inappropriate in the first

tion FU ismatch between th
je jue to å M n the reproduced source practice and the

mmient context.
reciple | i,

attempts to implement Taylorism in British coal mines in the interwar
7 jod provides an illuminating example, As discussed in Chapter 4, the
pritish coal-mining industry was, until about 1920, characterized by a low
degree of mechanization and very labor-intensive coal-getting processes.
However, extensive changes took place during the interwar years. The new
ind much more effective Longwall method for coal getting was introduced
multaneously with new technology, among which the electric coal-cutter
machine was especially important. Inspired by templates from American
mining industry and from contemporary Fordism and U.S. fabric organiz-
ing the early 1920s was also a period of comprehensive efforts to reproduce
scientific management—or Taylorist principles—of management and work
organizing in the British coal-mining industry.

An important prerequisite for the Taylorization of U.K. coal mining was
mechanization, which took off in the first decades of the twentieth century.
The introduction of electric coal-cutting machines and conveyor belts radi-
cally transformed colliers’ work and paved the way for scientific management
principles of work organizing (Tailby, 2011). What was introduced was a rigid
job design and detailed organizing of workers’ tasks and time. Tasks, which
were previously handled flexibly within groups of eight to ten workers, were
now split up, standardized, and allocated to single workers who were sup-
posed to specialize and repetitively executing a limited number of tasks. There
was also a detailed organizing and prescribing of the timing of the various
work operations. The typical cycle of 24-hour operations was first scheduled
in three shifts: The night shift undercut the coal by using the machine cut-
ter, the day shift broke down the coal and loaded it on the conveyor belts,
while the afternoon shift disassembled the conveyor belts and moved the
gear further into the pit. The timing of each operation was further detailed
and prescribed in sequences within each shift (Wellisz, 1953). Another cen-
tral Taylorist-inspired element was the introduction of time studies of the
miners’ job performances and an incentive wage system with individual pay-
ment and bonuses tied strictly to the work actually done (Langrogne, 1919).
With Fordism in American fabrics as a template, a new role for supervisors

188 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

was introduced whose task was to overview and control that the Miners
| dj ned plans and schedules.

performed according to prede | p mn

By the start of the inter war period, severa uer P pp Å ons Some
of them within the mining business, had already imp — laylorist Prin.
ciples and their experiences were known to TF U.K. il Owners and
engineers (Stewart, 1935). However, the most important temp ate Was Fred.
erick Taylor's own principles, which he had formulate | in his Publication,
(e.g. Taylor, 1911). His principles were particularly hera ded by his core dig.
ciples, which were a group of about 50 American EEE Who were
early adopters of Taylor's principles (Nelson, 1974). Even more important wa,
the American profession of mechanical engineers (Shenhav, 1999), Taylor
gospel about industrial management as å science was also well known among
mining engineers from the early interwar years, both from curriculums in
contemporary engineering education and from a new type of publications
engineering periodicals, which were available from around the turn of the
century. These publications (such as Engineering Magazine and American
Machinist) were widely distributed and read by members of the engineering

profession (Shenhav, 1999).
Even though there were many promotors of the idea of replicating Taylorigt

work organizing in U.K. coal mines, some actors were much more active than
others. A highly influential agent and translator was Samuel Mavor (1863-
1943), an electric and mining engineer and partner in Glasgow-based firm
Mavor & Coulson. As noted by Tailby (2011), owners of the firms that manu-
factured coal-getting equipment were among the most eager to promote and
prescribe a Taylorist work organization of the mines “to approximate more
closely with that in the then modern factory” (Tailby, 2011: 157), and thus to
adjust mens work to the logic of the machines. Mavor & Coulson was a major
coal technology manufacturer and was the first to manufacture electric coal-
cutting machines. By the end of World War I, the continental coal-producing
countries bought about 90 percent of their Longwall mining equipment from
Mavor & Coulson (Editorial, in Colliery Guardian, July 1965). Sam Mavor
was very knowledgeable and enthusiastic about Taylorist work organizing.
Before the interwar period, he had visited mine owners and mine engineers
in Canada and the United States. Some of them had already adopted Taylors
principles. As a major supplier of mining technology, Mavor also personally
knew most of the chief engineers and owners of the largest U.K. coal mines.
As a promotor of scientific management in the mines, Mavor had two charac-
teristics. Firstly, he was convinced that contemporary Ford fabric organizing
was an appropriate template and that the entire Taylor package of princi-
ples for work organizing should be transferred and implemented as means


of minute to minute intervals in relat;
on to work done” as a means “to per-

petually refining and intensifying the performance of work” (Mavor, 1924

secondly, Mavor was a very powerful and influential translator His ;
base reflected that he combined the authority of being the scarica
manufacturer of mining equipment with deep insight in coal mining hå

different parts of the world—and stron
| ersonal ne !
and engineers. SP tworks to mine owners

were ee Åre that the attempts to change the organizing of work in
British coa sn by principles of scientific management had largely failed.
The area and breakup of the autonomous working group, the intro-
duction of a piece-wage system, and close control-oriented supervision led to
much harder worker conditions. Absenteeism increased, and the rigid piece-
wage kn _ : constant source of tension, leading to numerous stoppages
and strikes (Phillips, 1976; Church et al., 1990). For example, Wellisz (1953)
identified 640 stoppages between 1947 and 1950 due to strikes, just in mines
located in the north-western part of the country. Throughout the interwar
years, overall productivity in U.K. coal mines was modest (Tailby, 2011), and
clearly below the owners’ and leaders’ ambitions and expectations. In their
seminal study of a sample of coal mines in the late 1940s, Trist and Bam-
forth (1951) revealed that colliers adapted to implemented Taylorist work
principles by developing strong norms of low productivity.

How can we understand and explain the many negative consequences that
followed from the attempts to replicate fabric and Taylorist organizing in U.K.
coal mines in the interwar period? There are three main reasons.

Lack of target context knowledge. Expressed in translation terms, a very
important reason for the replication failure was that the main promotors and
translators lacked sufficient knowledge of the target context and the existing
work practices. The handgot system of coal getting was largely performed by
self-contained working units that had internal flexibility and with workers
related to strong social ties. These working units were characterized by high
internal complexity in task performance and a low degree of explicitness (tac-
itness), which made them difficult for outsiders to comprehend. The copying
of Taylorist principles ripped up the established working units. This led to
severe social and psychological reactions and caused absenteeism and stop-
pages, However, as Trist and Bamforth (1951) revealed, the colliers lacked the

precise language to conceptualize an
emotional reactions towards the supervisors an

d communicate their experiences and
d translators of the Taylorist


190 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

ob ni PRE i å i Å > Can

principles. In addition, the most important translators were engineers by pro.
fession. Their training and devotion to physics and the working of Machine.
were often paralleled with a trained incapacity to aner and understand the
psychological and sociological reasons for the colliers reactions to the rigid

Taylorist organizing of their work. |
The configuring challenges. Å challenge for translators is to relate and ¢ on.

figure “the new” with “the existing.” The more the new’ differs from “the
existing,’ the harder it is to configure, and the more chances increase for

translation failure. In Chapter 4, three types of relatedness are outlined. loose
coupling, weaving, and replacement. “Replacement” means that the new
practice shall replace (not only come in addition to or be weaved together
with) existing practices in the target organizational context. This is Often
the most challenging type of configuration that translators face. In the cage

of replicating fabric and Taylorist principles in U.K. coal mines, it mean:
that most colliers had to give up the way they had worked and cooperated
before within the relatively autonomous units—and now perform their work
with new standardized tasks under close supervision and control. In sum, it
meant that the difference between the work organizing in the coal mines that
the mechanized Longwall method and the Taylorist principles required—
compared to the existing work organizing based on groups for self-regulation
and "responsible autonomy” (Trist and Bamforth, 1951: 6), was huge. The
challenge for the involved actors on the employer's side—the translators—to

try to balance and adapt these two organizing principles was not realized and
hardly acknowledged—a conclusion that leads into the third observation,

Slow learning processes. Translators may shift from one initially chosen
translation rule to another if they experience that they do not achieve what
was expected. As already pointed at, the interwar period was character-
ized by numerous negative reports and lessons from the British coal-mining
industry. Overall, however, this did not lead to changes in the usage of a
reproducing translation mode when implementing the templates from fab-
rics and the Taylorist work organizing principles. The reproducing mode
was maintained, and an important reason was the way owners and leaders
interpreted the increase in absenteeism, strikes, and persistent low produc-
tivity. They were mainly conceived of as expressions of colliers’ resistance
to change and unwillingness to adapt, but of temporary character (Mitchell,
1933; Wellisz, 1953; Goldthorpe, 1959).

However, there are reasons to suggest that shifts in translation rule from a
reproducing mode to a modifying mode could have reduced and somehow
also solved the problems. This is indicated by Tavistock researchers’ obser-
vations and experiments with so-called composite work groups throughout

EE TT ET ee

Ån!

an AE i da VI pink VE ba tin HE GE ‘ den


—

higher output, a 50 percent cut in absenteeism, and lower production costs

the problems: “a complicated, rigid and large-scale work system borrowed
with too little modification from an engineering culture appropriate to the
radically different situation of the factory” (Trist and Bamforth, 1951: 23).

Radical mode: Success and failures

The importance of translation performance and the deliberate choice of
translation rules for outcomes of knowledge transfer processes can also be
illustrated with examples where translators have applied a radical transla-
tion mode. As outlined in Chapter 5, a radical translation mode is defined as
translators’ inclination to act relatively unbound by the source context ver-
sion when creating a target context version of it. A radical mode may lead
to severe differences between source and target context versions of a cer-
tain practice. In the following two cases are presented where involved actors

applied a radical translation mode—and with different outcomes.

The making of the Norwegian coworker dialogue

In the late 1960s, there were several attempts to implement various ver-

sions of U.S.-based performance appraisal and counselling (PAC) systems in
C systems are goal setting,

Norwegian organizations. Central features of PA


192 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfe

both at the organizational and individual level, surveillance and measy.

of individual job performance and goal EE PS feedback
to the employee, including questions of payme ines n to Perfor.
mance (Burke, 1996; Otley, 1999), Among the ear on i me Organization,
in Norway were large multinationals such as i , me and Hydro
However, representations of the Norwegian Con eC re ion o | rade Unions
(LO) were rather skeptical. As noted in Chapter 9, imp ementing U.S.-bage 4
PAC systems was seen as a potential attack on the CO pi wage bargain.
ing institution, a new effective management steering too and a threat to the
strong values of collectivity and equality in Norwegian working life, There.
fore, the very powerful trade unions tried to slow down the further spread
of PAC systems in Norway. From the early 1970s, it was evident that the
U.S.-based concept could not be adopted by Norwegian organizations With-
out a lot of resistance and conflict (Wollebæk, 1989; Røvik, 2002). On the
other hand, both employers’ and employees’ federations acknowledged the

advantages of many other aspects of PAC systems, such as systematized and
routinized communication at the individual level between the leaders and

the led.
Around the mid-1970s there was a growing mutual awareness among cer-

tain actors that the U.S.-based PAC concept needed to be translated to fit into
the Norwegian working-life context. Although various actors were involved,
three people were especially active translators. The first was Knut Wollebæk,
an economist, consultant, and later director in the Confederation of Nor-
wegian Enterprises (NHO). The second was Jan-Erik Stenberg, an engineer
who graduated from Michigan Technological University in 1960 and worked
with 3M in the United States for five years, especially in transforming the
concept of Management by Results to a company-wide practice. He returned
to Norway in 1965 and worked with several of the largest Norwegian con-
sultancies. The third was Knut Jorem, an economist and director of IBM
in Norway. The three men all knew each other and exchanged ideas about
a PAC-concept adapted to the Norwegian context. They also shared some
common characteristics. They were leaders in strong and powerful organiza-
tions, and they were connected to strong professional networks, which also
included international actors, Stenberg, in particular, had strong connections
to various American firms and consultancies. They were also authors, who
published their ideas on the subject in numerous books. They also had slightly
different roles as translators of the PAC concept. Stenberg was inspired by
ideas of Management by Results in working outa Norwegian version of PAC.
Jorem was primarily concerned about taking care of Norwegian working-life
traditions and avoiding developing an “alien” PAC concept for Norwegian


Reimagining That Translators and Translations Make a Difference 193

organizations, It sr also he who, in his 1977 book, coined the concept of
-oworker dialogue; in Norwegian: “Medarbeider-samtale” (Jorem, 1977).
Wollebæk was the more practitioner-style translator. His position as å
director in the Confederation of Norwegian Enterprises, as well as his var-
jous professional networks, added legitimacy and authority to his translation
offorts. He early acknowledged that the U.S.-based PAC concept had to be
radically transformed if it was to be accepted and adopted widely among
Norwegian organizations. His translation performance was characterized by
HWO paths. The first was to decouple a Norwegian version from the strong
influence of Management by Objective (MBO) ideas in the U.S.-based PAC
concept. This was a challenging translation operation because, in the Ameri-
-an versions, the MBO ideas and practices were so intertwined with the softer
aspects of counselling that it resembled a binary alloy. However, Wollebæk
-arefully took it apart. For example, the decoupling came to expression in
sne of the pieces of advice for how to conduct a coworker dialogue: in such
, dialogue, the manager and the employee could focus upon the results of
the employee's work efforts and could try to interpret the causes behind the
-esults. However, they should try to avoid analyzing results in relation to pre-
defined goals (Kummen, 2008). The second path in Wollebæk's translation
was his efforts to make the coworker dialogue fit into the Norwegian tradition
of the employers and employees’ federations having very strong positions,
not least in the institutions of collective bargaining of wages for large groups
of employees. To avoid clashing with this tradition, Wollebæk made a radical
deviation from the American PAC concept. He advised that any questions
about wages and payment should not be a theme in the dialogue. In Norway,
there is also a strong and institutionalized tradition that union represen-
tatives should participate in meeting and decisions that involve questions
about working conditions, wages, hiring, dismissals, major reorganizations,
etc. Thus, the idea of a coworker dialogue that only included the manager and
the employee was met with skepticism from the unions. Wollebæk was aware
of this and paid much attention to translating a role for union representations
within the coworker dialogue concept. He advised that they should not par-

ticipate in the dialogue. However, they were appointed a role in the follow-up
of any initiatives that the manager and the employee had eventually agreed

upon.
In sum, Wollebæk had made a radical translation of the American PAC

t to the Norwegian coworker dialogue. In terms
ustrates how translators can be able

I, cultural, and institutional barriers

concept and transformed i
of the barrier approach, this case ill

to sense and find solutions to nationa
in knowledge transfers between source and target organizational contexts.

—


also a successful translation. The coworker dia.
e authoritative dialogue version. It is Wide]
arts of working life in Norway (Røvik, 2002)

In many respects, it was
logue was largely accepted as th
‘nstitutionalized and used in all p

A radical Chinese translation of happiness: Failure or
success?

It is not unusual for attempts to apply a ! adical translation mode in know}.
edge transfers to fail. One main reason (among several others) is that complex
cause-and-effect relationships pertinent to the desired source practice can
get lost in radical translations. Thus, it may be hard to recreate the outcomes
in the source context in the target contexts. An example of a radical trans.
lation that apparently failed is provided in a study of attempts to transfer
a Western practice—the routinized measuring of individuals self-reported
happiness (happiness indices)—to Chinese local government (Li, 2015),
Happiness indices built on a psychological conceptualization of happiness as
each individual’s subjective well-being (Veenhoven, 1984) and can be mea-
sured with psychometric methods. Happiness indices have attracted a lot of
attention, due to research-based insights; an example is the so-called East-
erlin paradox, which refers to observations showing that an increase in an
individual’s income does not necessarily lead to an increase in his/her feel-
ing of happiness and subjective well-being (Easterlin, 1974; Easterlin et al,
2012). Thus, the happiness indices are partly constructed in contrast to tradi-
tional indicators and measures of people's level of welfare in terms of classic
socio-economic factors. Several Western countries have adopted the happi-
ness indices (among them the United Kingdom, Canada, and France) and
incorporated it into their routinized accounting systems.

In 2011, the leadership of the Guangdong province in China decided to
adopt and implement the practice of happiness indices. The announced plan
was to implement routines to systematically monitor the province inhabi-
tants’ happiness and subjective well-being, as had already been done in some
Western countries. However, the ideas and practices of happiness indices
were very different from the dominant thinking in China about what con-
stitutes peoples’ well-being and how it should be measured and accounted.
An individualistic, psychological based happiness concept deviates drasti-
cally from China’s hard-core economically centered systems of performance
measurement. China is a highly centralized country, where local officials are
held responsible for adding to peoples’ welfare almost exclusively by working
to achieve predefined economic production goals, In the case of happiness


there in connection with the introduction of happiness induces (Li, 2015)
special attention was paid to Nanfang Daily because it is the only orovinge-
wide newspaper and because it is administered by the local Guangdong
branch of the Gomraunist Party. Thus, the opinions of happiness indices
hat come to expression in this newspaper reflect the official interpretation
and translation, of this practice by the powerful Guangdong Provincial Party
Committee, who were the key translators,

The analysis of the print media discourse depicts a radical translation pro-
ess. Although the translators did not explicitly reject the fundamental source
context concept of subjective well-being, they urged that happiness was
dependent upon external objective conditions; meaning economic growth. It
was acknowledged that happiness reflected each individual's subjective expe-
ence, but it was simultaneously argued that the primary determinant was
objective socio-economic conditions. Economic growth was defined as an
effective means to increase the subjective well-being and feeling of happi-
ness. The radical character of this translation can be depicted like this: While
the main insight underlying the Western happiness indices’ concept is that
subjective well-being is only weakly correlated with objective factors (such
as economic growth and income), this was turned around in the Chinese
translated version, where such objective factors were interpreted as the main
solution to increase citizens’ happiness.

The radical translation of happiness indices in Guangdong was primarily a
radical domestication, meaning that the Western source version was severely
adapted to existing thinking and accounting practices in the province. Con-
sequently, this also meant that much of the Western happiness ideas and
practices were washed out and lost in translation. This is indicated in a study
of the extent to which the Western version of happiness indices material-
ized in the official Guangdong accounting systems (Li, 2015). Data shows that

although some happiness indicators were included, they were assigned lim-
rast to the dominant weightings assigned to the tradi-

ited weighting, in cont
where economic growth was the most prominent

tional objective indicators,
indicator.

From one angle,
caused by usage of an inappro
process can be interpreted throu
example of a knowledge transfer that
barring factors. In this perspective, the

this transfer process can look like a translation failure,
priate translation rule. Thus, the translation
gh the lens of the barrier approach and as an
fails because of the presence of certain
effect of barriers overrules the efforts


196 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

of translators: It is supposed that the translators were not able to find Solution,
to and overcome the challenges of barriers constituted by severe Institution,
and cultural distance between source and target contexts.

However, viewed from a different angle the transfer of the Happinegg
indices—practice to Guangdong can be conceived more of as a transla.
tion success. In this interpretation, which is the most likely one, the radica|
domestication of Happiness indices 1s the result of deliberate translation
work performed by involved actors and thus, which cannot be understood
and explained without considering the role of the translators. In fact, the
outcome of this transfer reflects the role of very powerful translators who
made deliberate choices and who also managed to balance competing cop.
cerns. First: Far from the ancient ideal of the translator as a neutral Mediator
who conscientiously recreates a target version of a source text, the involyeg
actors in the transfer of happiness indices to Guangdong were very power.
ful actors with strong interests in certain outcomes. The powerful and thys
most important translations that occurred in Nanfang Daily were largely the

voice of the Communist Party—the Guangdong Provincial Party Commit.
tee. The Party obviously had strong interests and was dedicated to preserving
the official Chinese policy on economic growth—and the underlying strongly
institutionalized belief that this is the main route to a happier Chinese peo-
ple. In this respect, this case is another reminder that translators and their

translations make a difference. Second: Translation failures in knowledge
transfers often stem from translators who are not sufficiently knowledgeable
about either the source version or the target context. However, this was not
the case in the transfer for happiness indices to Guangdong. The Chinese
translators were aware of and knowledgeable about the Western happiness
indices and its foundation upon subjective well-being and explicit disso-
ciation from the notion that happiness is a reflection of an individual, a
group, or a nations objective socio-economic conditions. Obviously, the Chi-
nese translators were also even more knowledgeable about their own target
context—the province of Guangdong. Thus, they were able to make deliber-
ate decisions—and so they did—about how to transform the Western version
to make it fit into the Guangdong context. Although they radically domesti-
cated the Western happiness indices version, also some elements of the source
version were taken care of and came to expression in the Guangdong target
version as a minor set of indicators reflecting a more subjective Western-
inspired happiness indices concept. By the translation work they performed,
they also balanced two different concerns. On the one hand, the translators


-oncept of happiness indices in the

environments of what it means to be |

Modifying mode: Successes and failures

Translators also frequently operate in a modifying mode in knowledge trans-
fers. This mode is associated with attempts to balance concerns for vepliestitg
4 source context practice with concerns for adapting the practice sufficiently
to make it fit in with and work in the target context. Such balancing acts
are challenging. While modification can be a route to success in knowledge
transfers, it may also lead to failures. Outcomes will often depend on the

translators’ knowledge of the source and target contexts and on how they
perform the translation.

Modifying co-production in Denmark

An example of successful modification is provided by an attempt to transfer
the practice of co-production to the municipality of Aalborg in Denmark.
The concept of co-production refers to direct participation by citizens in the
delivery of various public sector services (Parks et al., 1981; Van Eijk and
Gascö, 2018). The concept and practices of co-production have spread rapidly
since the turn of the millennium, especially in Western countries (Pestoff,
2012), but now also to non-Western parts of the world (Cepiku and Gior-
dano, 2014). An important driver is the widespread acknowledgement that
governments are no longer able to be the only provider of public services.
The civil society, citizens, and various stakeholders must be involved as co-
producers (Osborne, 2010). As in other European countries, co-production
has also become very popular among Danish municipalities (Torfing and Tri-
antafillou, 2016; Brix et al., 2020). However, although a popular concept, less
is known about what happens when municipalities learn from each other

and attempt to translate representations of practices to co-production prac-
na Moller Mortensen (2020) has studied

tices in their own organization. Nan
nt co-production in the department for

an attempt to transfer and impleme


198 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

municipality of Aalborg. The two main

goals were (a) to secure more active input (co-production) from the Service
users themselves to the service production and delivery, and (b) to seCUte

power-sharing, meaning that not only the professional but also the S€rvice
user should have a say in questions about the design and quality of the

provided service. | Nr

The external template that guided the implementation - the Municipal.
ity was made up of a mix of other municipalities experiences With co.
production, in addition to what were conceived of as the core ideas from the
literature about what co-production practices should are of and the out.
comes to which it probably would lead. There were five such outcome logicg”
in the template: (1) Innovation potential; that is, increasing collaboration with
service users and incorporating actors in their networks and the civil society
in co-production. (2) Individual well-being and empowerment, meaning that
service users should actively participate in the service production and deliy-
ery process, and also be empowered and co-deciders. (3) Effectiveness and
efficiency, which means producing and delivering public services at high qual- |

ity and with lower costs. (4) Mobilization of resources; that is, producing new
public services and retaining old ones with increased use of nongovernmen-

tal resources. (5) Democracy, which means enabling and encouraging service

users to participate in debates about the type, design, and quality of public
services, and, in general, decentralize power down to the service users.

Mortensen (2020) analyzed the translation processes, which took place at
three hierarchical levels in the organization, starting at the first (top) level
(department level), via the second level (the Center for Vitality), and then
continuing at the third level (three frontline units). This means that sev-
eral actors were involved as translators in a hierarchical translation chain,
Mortensens study reveals a pattern in the translation processes over the three
organizational layers that is characteristic for a modifying translation mode.
On each level, as the idea of co-production finds its way through the trans-
lation chain, involved actors carefully either add some elements or make
explicit elements implicit, or they subtract some elements or make explicit
elements implicit, or toned down, in their translated versions. For example,
at the top (first) level, the translators added an element (improving the work
environment for the employees) that was not present in the template, while
they omitted the element of “democracy.” Further, the concern for power
sharing between service users and professionals in the template was toned
down at the first level translation. However, at the third level, in the frontline
units, this element was made explicit and re-emphasized.

elderly and disabled people in the


Reimagining That Translators and Translations Make a Difference 199

At the final stage, when the concept of co-production was about to be

implemented in the three frontline units, several groups of translators had
contributed with their modifications. Is it possible to identify an overarch-

ing pattern that makes the magnitude of modifications more intelligible?

A central feature of a modifying mode is efforts to balance concerns about
preserving the core cause-effect mechanisms of the template with concerns

about adapting sufficiently to conditions of the target context. When the
numerous single modifications of co-operation in Aalborg are seen in com-

parison, a main pattern of balancing efforts is revealed. What is totally left
out, however, is the element of “increasing democracy” and “increasing effec-
tiveness and efficiency.’ In fact, a clear indication of the elimination of the
economic element was that co-production efforts were initiated alongside
economic cutbacks. In addition, the element “innovation” was toned down.
What was especially taken care of from the template and emphasized in the
version to be implemented in the frontline units were the elements of involv-
ing the service users in the production and distribution of the services, and
the idea of power sharing between the service users and the professionals.
These elements were emphasized, enlarged, and concretized with detailed
methods for how to cooperate and coproduce in practice.

The transfer and translation of co-production to Aalborg municipality is
largely conceived of as successful, in the sense that the idea was materi-
alized and, so far, has led to enduring improved practices of cooperation
and co-production. There is a clear connection between the performance
of the translators and the successful outcomes. What the translators man-
aged through a series of deliberate modifications was to identify, preserve,
and recreate in the target version the core co-production cause-effect mech-
anisms in the template, while they also eliminated some elements and toned
down others that did not fit in or were conceived of as unnecessary and poten-
tially claims on limited resources. Thus, the translators’ modifying mode was
undoubtedly decisive for the successful outcome of the knowledge trans-
fer process. An interesting question is whether the translation mode was

deliberately chosen or not. The modifying mode was not chosen explicitly,
but more indirectly. Mortensen (2020) showed that the strategic level pro-
vided the second and especially the third level—the frontline units—with
relatively high degrees of autonomy to translate co-production into practice.
Such autonomy encouraged the translators to modify and adapt the concept.
However, the autonomy provided to the second and third level was based on
a mutual understanding among the involved actors at all hierarchical levels
about what the core ideas of co-production was (more involvement of the ser-
vice users and stakeholders in the production of service, combined with more


heory of Knowledge Transfer

300 ATranslation T
), and, simultaneously, a mutua] YR

ervice Users |
t of the s f co-production had to be sufcien

| concept 0 |
d effective local version.

empowermen
standing that the gener?

shaped into å concrete an

When modifying fails

The key feature of the modifying mode IS pp ør EG the main
reason for modifying failures IS translatore eng EE Met
between concerns for preserving source vernon and add for Making
it work in the target context. An app! opriate balancing per a De lost for
two reasons: either because of too much domestication, meaning too myc},
adaptation of the transferred representation * top target. context (00 much
foreignizing, which means too little adaptation of the source version to fit in
with the target context and host environment. opne

An example of the effects of too much domestication is provided in Szu-
lanski and Jensen’s (2008) study of transfer of franchising knowledge from
the headquarter of a large U.S.-based multinational corporation (MailBoxes
Etc.) to 23 of its foreign subsidiaries. The researchers collected data from the
processes between 1989 and 2003. The headquarters had made detailed man.
uals and blueprints for how the Master Licenses (MLs— individuals who own
the right to build a ML-network in a country or region) should work to make
their network grow and prosper. Data showed positive correlations between
outcomes and the degree to which the subsidiaries followed the blueprints,
The more the subsidiaries made local adaptations, the less their own networks
grew and prospered. Thus, local adaptations were not balanced against the
concern of preserving complex sets of interdependent activities inherent in
the headquarters’ franchising blueprint.

However, there are also numerous examples of transfer failures that can
be traced back to translators who miss the balancing point because they do
not sufficiently manage to modify and domesticate the template. One such
example stems from the Indo Norwegian Project (INF) 1953-1972, which
is broadly presented in Chapter 4. Part of this project was attempts to mod-
ernize the Indian state of Kerala’s fish industry and fishing fleet with bigger,
sp pe NE, i project was founded on knowledge

få ine fishery, but also adjusted to local


Reimagining That Translators and Translations Make a Difference 201

more reluctant and dismissive. Arne Martin Klausen (1968), an anthropolo-
gist, revealed that the Arayas’s avoidance of the project was deeply rooted in
their culture and their religious beliefs, For example, they resisted the mod-
ernization of the fleet with 25-foot fully mechanized and motorized fishing

vessels because such boats would force them to even do night fishing, which
collided with the strong Hindu belief of not disturbing “sleeping nature.”

It is reasonable to interpret the Arayass avoidance of the modernizing
project as caused by a translation failure. The knowledge and practices that
were transferred from Norway had not been sufficiently modified to fit into
the complex cultural and institutional context of the Hindu fishing society
of Araya. One important reason for the insufficient modification was that
the INF translators lacked knowledge about the Arayas and their culture.
Another appurtenant reason was the translators’ beliefs. They were convinced
that the 25-food highly mechanized and motorized vessels were the appro-
priate means for the Keralan fishers, as they had proved to be as cornerstones
in Norwegian coastline small-scale fishery. Thus, there are reasons to believe
that the INP translators neither possessed nor searched for modified versions
in response to the Arayas's reluctance to the project. However, the modern-
ization project could have been further modified based on a premise of more
adaptation to the Araya context. For example, motorizing the unmotorized
canoes (which were the common fishing boats in the area) without offer-
ing the fishers the 25-foot modern vessels could have been an appropriate
solution, closer to the balancing point between concerns for both source and

target contexts.

Discussion

A key feature of the six knowledge transfer cases presented above is the vari-
ation in outcomes. Four of the cases can be interpreted as successes and two
as less successful, or even as failures. How can these variations be understood
and explained? The six cases represent considerable variation in terms of
the organizational types involved (public organizations, business firms, and
interest organizations), their localization in space (United States, England,
China, Norway, Denmark, and India) as well as localization in time (varying
between 1920 and 2020). However, it is hard to imagine how the revealed
variations in successes could be traced back to these variables (time, space,
and organizational type). Many knowledge transfer scholars would try to
interpret the variations in light of insights from the barrier approach. There-
fore, it is likely that such explanation attempts will be made with reference


202 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

to variations in terms of absorptive capacity, for mal or ganizational Struc.
ture. social networks, cultural, geogt aphic and/or institutional distance, and
ferred knowledge. In one of the described Cases

characteristics of the trans

(the transfer of modern fishing technology to Kerala), the outcome can be

interpreted as reflecting certain barriers that have negatively influenced th ;
don below). Although some of the typical bay.

transfer processes (commente ag te :
riers are also present in the remaining cases, their etfects on the transfer

processes were more indirect and modest. | _ .
To what extent can the observed variations IN success between the cases hye

explained with reference to the translators’ knowledge of context and their
use of translation rules? There is no doubt that the translation rules and

the ways they are used set out important premises for the outcomes in the
six cases. However, there is no “one rule that fits all.” As illustrated, while

different rules may all lead to successes, the same rule applied in different
situations may lead to different outcomes. What is decisive is the involved
actors’ translation performance: how and to what extent they possess know.
edge about the relevant contexts, and how they choose, use, and eventually

shift translation rules.
A comparative analysis of the six cases reveals some interesting patterns

that may contribute to improved understanding of factors that generate
the variations in outcomes. Translation barriers and other challenges are
involved in all six cases. However, there are certain variations in the way they
are dealt with in the four successful cases (the McDonald's case, the case of

the Norwegian coworker dialogue, the case of co-production in Aalborg, and
the case of happiness indices in China) compared to the two others with less

favorable outcomes.
The McDonald's case is an example of successful application of a

reproducing-copying translation mode. Ray Kroc, the key actor and trans-

lator, faced two challenging barriers in his attempts to create a franchised

chain of numerous fast food replica units. One was the potential barring
effects of territorial franchising, which was the common principle of fran-

chise organizing in the early 1950s. The other was the potentially low degree
of absorptive capacity among the franchisees to pick up, understand, imple-
ment, and follow the franchisor's detailed recipes for the replicas without any
deviations. The way in which Kroc acted and managed to deal with these
two potential threats to his replication strategy is described above. Another
central feature of Kroc’s translation performance was his continuous trans-
lation activities, which means his efforts to maintain the replication strategy
for years; for example, by implementing and using a system for continuously
rigid monitoring of the franchisees’ performances.


Reimagining That Translators and Translations Make a Difference 203

The case of making a Norwegian coworker dialogue had a successful
outcome, too. However, compared to the MacDonald replication case, it
involved the use of the “opposite” rule of radical translation. The steng to
transfer the American Performance Appraisal and Counselling (PAC) sys-

tems to Norway was challenging for the translators. The cultural and institu-
tional differences between American and Norwegian working life amounted
to a serious transfer barrier. However, as shown above, the translators han-

died the barrier by radically transforming the American PAC system to what
is known as the Norwegian coworker dialogue. An important feature of the
group of translators was that they combined insights into American work-
ing life and the PAC system (the source context) with thorough knowledge
of the Norwegian society and working life. The usage of a radical translation
mode was based on deliberate decisions (information provided to the author
in interview with Stenberg and Wollebæk, July 2020). Early in the transfer
process, the group of three core translators discussed and knew that neither
a copy nor a slightly modified version of the American PAC system would be
possible in Norway.

The translation of co-production in Aalborg is a case where the modifying
translation rule was successfully chosen and applied. A potential transfer bar-
tier was formal organizational structure. The concept was adopted at the top
strategic level and was implemented from the top down across three hierar-
chical levels. Transfer across such vertical formal structures represents risks
of both distorting what is transferred and decelerating and even stopping
the process. However, such effects were avoided by choosing a modifying
translation mode, combined with high degrees of autonomy provided from
the strategic level to the two lower hierarchical levels. This translation and
implementation strategy, which was obviously built on trustful networks and
relationships across the hierarchical levels, was an important reason why the
involved actors managed to balance concerns for preserving the core cause-
effect mechanisms inherent in the concept of co-production with concerns
for making it work in the frontline units. Thus, the social networks among
the involved actors modified the potential barring effect of the formal verti-
cal structure and facilitated the successful outcome. Another reason for the

successful translation was the organizing of the translation process across
the three hierarchical layers. At each level, new sets of actors got involved
as translators. However, a selection of these translators from each level met
at various arenas organized for information exchange and discussions about

the co-production project. This organizing principle increased translators
knowledge of the translations that took place at the different hierarchical


on Theory of Knowledge Transfer

204 ATranslati

n and calibration of the translation.

i Å inatio
levels, and also increased coordi

— ancien the outcome of the transfer of happiness INdiceg
rom one

dong can be interpreted as å translation failure stemming from
to Guangdong ¢ ropriate radical translation mode. The alteration fol.
the usage of an peel? a ode was so severe that the Western original cop.
ie est opical-indiv dualistic conceptualization of happiness Was
idea o

almost totally washed out. In this perspective, the ar ren, and

itical di between the Western happiness indices and the Chinese
political differences eurmountable barrier for the translators, Howey,
target context ve = rn Get of this transfer should bette
or erme success. Undoubtedly, there were high bar.
Eaeditsin for the translators. The difference is huge between the
Western-inspired individualistic-psychological happiness concept Of subjec.
tive well-being and the dominant Chinese thinking of degree of happiness in
a population as a reflection of the socio-economic conditions of the nation,
Nevertheless, the translators managed to enact the barriers by balancing com.
peting concerns for a radical domestication of the concept to the Chinese
context, while simultaneously including a few elements from the source ver-
sion in the Chinese version—thereby also signaling adherence to norms of
modernity circulating in broad institutional environments. The outcome and
partial success of this transfer process can be traced back to three key fea-
tures of the translation performance. First, the involved actors were highly
knowledgeable about both the Western happiness indices (source) and the
Chinese target context. Second, radical translation was an appropriate trans-
lation rule to apply, and probably the only possible one. Third, the translators
were very powerful. They made authoritative decisions throughout the pro-
cess and ensured that their translated version materialized in Guangdong
practices.

The two remaining cases had unsuccessful or less successful outcomes. Did
they have something in common that can shed light on why they did not
succeed?

The case of attempts to replicate Ford fabric and Tayloristic work organiz-
ing in U.K. mines between 1920 and 1955 had severe long-lasting negative
consequences for the working environment and led to strikes and low pro-
ductivity. There are three main reasons for this transfer failure. First, the
replication strategy was founded on poor knowledge about the existing col-
lier work organizing, which were characterized by strong social ties among

h autonomy for each working unit. Second, the replica-
he mines ripped up the existing collier work organizing


å its re verb, replaced it with a very different organizing. Third, in
ad on 0 poor knowledge about the existing collier work organizing, the
replication strategy was founded on engineers’ strong belief in Taylorism.

rer to a trained incapacity to adjust the principles to better fit
in with the target context of U.K. coal mines. The trained incapacity came to

expression in slow learning processes despite severe and enduring negative
a following the Taylorization of the mines. However, with bet-
ter translation work this barrier could and should have been overcome, for
two main reasons. First, the negative consequences of the attempts to Tay-
lorize the U.K. mines were severe and lasted for decades, Normally, such
enduring negative effects would trigger intense learning efforts to find out
what causes the problems (Argyris, 1976). However, in this case, the learning
efforts were few and the learning processes were very slow. Second, despite
the strong belief in scientific management principles of work organizing
among engineers, many of them possessed firm experience-based knowledge
about the traditional way of work organizing in U.K. mines: the autonomous
work group with strong social ties and high internal flexibility. For example,
Samuel Mavor, the highly influential agent of Taylorism, obviously possessed
such knowledge.

Thus, an important reason for this transfer failure was that the involved
actors maintained the reproducing mode long after it should have been
changed to a modifying mode. The Tavistock researchers’ results from exper-
iments with alternative models for coal mine work organizing clearly indi-
cated that a shift to modifying translation rules would probably have led to
fewer problems.

The failures to transfer knowledge and modern fishing technology from
Norway to Araya in Kerala in the 1950s can also be traced back to aspects
of the involved translators’ performances. Although the translators had ini-
tially applied a modifying mode and tried to balance between the Norwegian
source context practices and the Kerala context, the cultural barriers between
these contexts were severe and difficult to conceptualize and enact. ‘Thus, the
Norwegian translators lacked insights into the Arayas's cultural and religious
beliefs, The cultural barrier was the main reason why the translators were not
able to understand the Arayas's avoidance of the modernization efforts and,
consequently, why they did not manage to further modify to make the mod-
ernizing initiatives fit into the Araya context. This illustrates a point made in
Chapter 4 about the importance of the translatability of existing practices in
the target organization. In this case, the translatability of the desired source
practice (the Norwegian modern fishing technology) was high among the


306 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

while they did not understand how existing

‘an-based translators,
Norwegian-base y tied to c ultural norms.

| deep!

This chapter has focused upon the role of translators’ performance; that ig,

how they de facto act in knowledge transfer pr pee The cases presented
above indicate the importance of involved actors translation performance to
understand why transfer outcomes vary, The translation approach has been
contrasted with a barrier approach to understand variations in transfer out-
comes. However, there is a complex interplay between the barriers known
from knowledge transfer studies and translators’ performances (Carlile,
2004), Obviously, outcomes of knowledge transfer processes can sometimes
be traced back to the presence of certain transfer barriers, which transla-
tors do not manage to overcome (as illustrated in the case of the transfer
of modern fishing technology to the Arayas in India). However, involved
actors’ translation performance often have a clear independent effect on the
transfer barriers, which may cause both transfer failures and successes. For
example, transfer barriers are sometimes modest or almost absent, but poor
translation work still leads to undesirable outcomes. The case of transfer of
Tayloristic working organizing principles to the U.K. coal mines provides an
illuminating example. Especially from the late 1950s and until the early 1970s,
the involved leaders and mining engineers were poor translators; they were
slow learners and should have shifted from a reproducing translation mode

to a modifying mode.
Yet, most clearly, the independent effects of translation performance fre-

quently come to expression in processes where translators face barriers,
overcome them, and contribute to successful outcomes. Such successful
barrier-handling translation performances are demonstrated in the McDon-
ald’s case, the making of the Norwegian coworking dialogue, the case of
co-production in Aalborg, and partly also in the case of transfer of hap-
piness indices to Guangdong. Bluntly, in these cases the explanation for
outcomes of knowledge transfer processes is not transfer barriers, but the
translators’ performances. They manage to enact and overcome the barriers
based on knowledge of source and target contexts and by choices of appropri-
ate translation rules. In the successful cases highlighted above, the translators
managed to handle various potential transfer barriers, such as formal orga-
nizational structure, lack of absorptive capacity, and geographical, national,
cultural, and institutional distance between source and target organizational


Reimagining That Translators and Translations Make a Difference 207

contexts. Å common denominator in these cases is that the translators—

based on knowledge of the source context, the desired source practice, and
the target context—chose and used appropriate translation rules.

In addition to knowledge of contexts and usage of appropriate translation
rules, there were some characteristic details pertinent to the translation per-
formance in each of the four cases that contributed to the outcomes. For
example, in the McDonald’s case, the central translator Ray Krocs strong

efforts to maintain the replication strategy for years, not allowing local
adaptations, was clearly important for the companys worldwide franchis-
ing success. An interesting feature in the case of translating the American
PAC concept to the Norwegian Development dialogue was the knowledge
and power base of the core group of three translators. Together they pos-
sessed and combined considerable knowledge about the American and the
Norwegian contexts, while they were simultaneously powerful, well-known,
and widely respected actors based in various very powerful Norwegian orga-
nizations. This background increased the chances of having their translated
versions accepted, for example by the strong Confederation of Norwegian
Enterprises (NHO) and the strong (and skeptical) Norwegian Confedera-
tion of Trade Unions (LO). Powerful translators are also a central feature
in the Guangdong-case and an important factor to consider in order to
understand how the translators managed to handle national, cultural, and
institutional barriers. In the case of translating co-production in Aalborg,
a specific translation performance element contributed to the positive out-
come. The translators handled the potential barring effect of the formal
organizational structure that separated hierarchical (vertical) levels in the
municipality by organizing arenas where a selection of involved actors from
each hierarchical level met and coordinated translated versions across the
vertical layers.

Although transfer barriers are important, empirical studies of such barri-
ers, when seen in comparison, account for a limited portion of the variations
in outcomes of knowledge transfer processes. This indicates that the relative
impact of how involved translators de facto perform the translations is high,
and is therefore important to consider in order to understand and explain
variations in transfer outcomes. In fact, involved translators make signifi-
cant differences in knowledge transfer processes, far beyond what barrier
approaches so far have accounted for. Table 6.1 sum ups the main insights

from this chapter.

—— awe eee ee

=> oe GP — —

=o.» == ewes eee we Sr

Ce ee


JOAPJA [PNUIES

J3UMO-ssaUuISsnq pue AjzIeg ]STUNUIUIO”)
ZL61-€S61 W2loid 1323UI8Ud paseq asouTYy 34] JO
ULISAMION-OPuU] -MOSSP]D) SEM qouriqg suop
3U] JO SI3qUIDUI JOJPJSUEI [ENUD -guen-) [220] SJOJLJSUEI] væ OM
pue uoneztuId -npur pue [NIIMOd 24} sem yun se Surjoe S1oqey JO jnuy pure 913
-Poul JIUIOUO023 V "S193UI8Ud SUI uone[SuEI] IYJ, Ayyediorunul ay) ut -UIJS YLFJ-UPS
pure [22150[0UYD3)] -urur PosEq-YN ss “SAOJesueT [ENPIA sJ2A9] JEDIYypJe2JIIY T3J0( JNUY :S10) SJOJEJSUEPI)
UO $JAadx3 uvISaM Åpermadsa put --Tpul 3391909 ay} 3210) ye s33Å0[durd -PJSUP.I] 3317] sory Åey st PJA[OAUI
-ION jo dnois v SJOJPIJSUEI Aue] AyQuapt 0) prey] JO sdnois 931U], jo dnois 9109 V :1OJPJSUE.I] Ady FUO $SJOPV
(UOISSTUIO (Uorssruro pordde
pure uonIppy) (8urkdoD) (uonera1v) pue uonIppv) (uoner21[v) (3urAdo)) apna uone]
pour SuLAjIpo|] >pour sulnpoiday po peDIPEY pour SuIÅ PO 3pour [RdIpey pour $unnporday -SUP. UTEN
SJILLIEG 30UPISIP Ayioedes
sissuisus SUTUTU jeuoneu pue (Pen13A) SJJLLIEG [PUOHEU sandiosqy -
JILLIEQ—3D0UPISTP Suoure Ärureu ÅyN qe>nrod/preuon 31N)>N.nSs jeuoyn pue qeuonn) 320UPISTP p>a[0AUI
[erny[nO -dedeour paureip -nynsur Penn) -BZ{UPSIO [EUIIO4 -Qsur Jen[nO [eoryde1503n) - SJOLLIEG
| JoJsuen oy}
3Inpe 3INJre [nyssaoons Apieg [nyssaoons Ayureyy [nyssaoons ÅJurN [nyjssooons AyuTeyy JO 3u109J00Q
eIpuy uop3ury ÅRMION S3JEIS PaUUN
‘ekery Å30j0uypa payun ‘sourm PUIYD *saJrpu preg ‘onsoyerp sur 958) SUISTYpUEIJ SaSEI
Surysy uIpoy 9 UT UISLIOJÅPY G ssaurddep F *Uuon>npoid-o') £ -NJOMO') Z sppeuogonN 9Y I /SJJGELIEA

— —

—

SIBJSULI] DSPS|MOUY U! S10} L]SULI} JO 9]O1 34] SUNEIISNJ|I Sesed XIS -AUeEWILUNS T'9 9)GQEL

SJIOJJ>

AWUISPOU dU} JO
IDULPIOAR SSBÅPIV
3U) puerjsispun

0} 3]GeuN 313M
SIOJLISULT] 3} {3X9}
-U0> (BÅRIV) 13810]
94] JO 38p3[MOUY
JO yr] 01 ong

BÅRIV JO JX3JUO0>

Eg) JG) OP
1Y1sur payer] Arty
yng ‘(ASojouy ra}
sulysy) 3914 e1d
32JNOS Pallsap 3}
pure 3x3jJU0) 321NOS
34) Inoge apgeagp>
-JMOUY ÅPSAISU3JX>
313M SJOJPJSULIJ

soni UONPJSULI]
ayetidoiddeut jo
3JULUIJUTLUI pue
—sassad0id FuruIeay
MOJS Ul passaidxo
'SJOJPJSUPI] SuouTe
Ajmedeour paure 0}
p3junoure 3jejduray
SE JUIUIIFLULUI
2YNUdDS/UISLIOJÅE,
0} 39U3JI3YPE SUOIS
1x3]u0> guru “yp
3912] 3y] jJnoqe
31q238p3[mOuy Ayjaye
-J9poul pur ‘p10j
pue SUuIzIUP310
yIOM JO sajdip

-ULId 211GeJ p10.
pure JU3UIIFPUPLUI
2YNUIDS ynNoge IJQE
-38p3|Mouy Aysry
313M OUM SJOJP]
“Suen peseq-"T NN)

Ayreg ISTUNUIUIO')
J53UIy ) 34) JO
qouerg [0] oy
—SJOJPJSUL.1] 3U]
JO aseq Jamod
jeonrjod 3uo.s
A1I3A 3U] :3UIO>
-JNo IO} asrurdasd
queyoduly

1d32u05 saorpur
ssaurddey us
-J5S3M 2UY) JNoge
3JQ238p>[MOUY
ÅpPe1apour pur
1X31]U05 13918]
34} JNOqe IJGe
-38p3[MOUY
AjTysty 313M OYM
SJOJPJSULI] poseq
-suopsueny

SJIUN 9U} SsoIDe
SUONPISULI] 2Yy1DIdSs
-JIUN 3910] 3JLIQHJED

pure 3JLUIPI00D

0} 3unno1 feroads
e Aq 3INJDNS
[eUONEZIUESIO

JEuLIO] JO Jao

sulieg jeyuajod

94} JO surpuey ay],

$)X3JUO0> 13810]
pue 321nOS JO 38p>
-[MOUY JAISUIJXD
p>urquuo> pue
passassod 12341380)
oym Ø10qrev Jo AN
-Pedrorunur ay) ur
paseq SJOJPISULIT,

SJOJPJSUEI]

JO dnois 3105
UOSI3d-3219)
34} JO aseq
J3MOd pure

ISEQ I8p>[MOUY
SUOIS AIDA SUT,

$}X9}U09

19818] pure 321NOS
34Y) Jnoqe 38p>
-[MOUY JAISUIJXI
p>UurquIod pue
p>ssassod oym
SJOJPIJSULI) PISLQ
-UPISSMION

aye, duis} 94} WO
SddSTYOUPI] [220]
Aq uonerap Sul
-Ausp Aqoisy} ‘sreaA
10} ASayerjs UO
-1]da1 3y) urejureur
0} (q) pue ‘soayQ
-U99UI SIUIOUODS
ysno1y) Aoedes
JANdIOSqe saastyo
-uelj 3JEJNUINS

0} (8) syIOyja $SJOIY

$J3STYDUELIJ [PNU3JOd
19918] SNOLIEA dU}

pue (QURINP]SJI SID
“WONG sppeuC PN)
32INOS 3Y] Jnoqe
I8p>[MOUY ULIY
P>UIQUIOD 20.1y

$3UI09JNO

10J saouanb
-35U0I

Im
—39UPULIOJIDd
119y) 10/pue
SJOJPJSUE.I)

341 JO

s3JNJPIJ
[eUuonIPPvV

$JX3JUO0>
jodie} put

32INOSs JO
93 pojMouy
SJOJEJSULIL


ri
Translation Competence

Implications for Knowledge Transfer Practices

Introduction

This final chapter zooms in on the consequences of the translation theory
for knowledge transfer practices. I argue that the theory has the potential to
influence involved actors’ translation performance, increasing the chances of

achieving desirable outcomes. The chapter coins and develops the key con-
cept of translation competence, which refers to translators knowledge about

how to translate practices and ideas to achieve desired ends in knowledge
transfers across organizational units.

Translation competence

The implication-for-practice theme, introduced earlier, immediately connects
to the enduring rigor-relevance debate within the field of organization and
management research (meaning the scientific quality of a contribution) and
its relevance for practices and practitioners. There is a strong notion within
the research community that there is a gap between rigor and relevance
that needs to be closed (Gulati, 2007; Nicolai and Seidl, 2010; Bartunek
and Rynes, 2014; Joullié and Gould, 2022). The literature on this theme is
comprehensive. In a literature review, Carton and Mouricou (2017) iden-
tified 253 articles published in 11 top-tier journals between 1994 and 2013
that mainly focused on the rigor-relevance theme. It is also a fast-growing
body of literature (Kieser, 2011) that offers various answers to the questions
of why the gap has arisen and whether and how it can be closed. Top-
tier journals are often the most prominent gatekeepers of the orthodoxy of
rigor. From this angle, the main reason for the rigor-relevance gap is the
lack of attention and the indifference of media and practitioners to orga-
nization and management research (Rousseau and McCarthy, 2007; Guest, |
2007; Clark et al., 2013). There are numerous observations indicating that

A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer. Kjell Arne Ravik, Oxford University Press, © Kjell Arne Røvik (2023).
DOI: 10.1093/0s0/9780198832362.003.0007

5 li See SE a oe Mr 93 POSES AONB va lO Se PEE oe aT


214 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

executives/practitioners rarely consider findings from management research
when making their decisions (Rynes et al. 2001; Bailey, 2016; Bozié et al.
2022). However, viewed from an orthodoxy porn, It is en acceptable to
try to close the rigor-relevance gap by negotiating and reducing the claim on

scientific rigor (Hambrick, 1994: Cummings, 2007). | |
From other less orthodox and more practice-oriented positions come

another main type of explanation: the gap has arisen because most of the
published management research lacks usefulness and thus, relevance for

practitioners. This may reflect the fact that researchers too seldom turn
to practitioners to get inspiration for new research projects (Sackett ang

Larson 1990). However, some analysts interpret the lack of relevance as
an expression of a fundamental divide between the domains of organiza.
tion and management research—and practice. These two activities (research

and practice) have been described as two specialized autonomous systems
operating according to different logics and in a high degree of isolation
from each other (Kieser and Leiner, 2009; Patterson and Harms, 2019:

Cooren and Seidl, 2020). The main reward system in management research,
which is most clearly spelled out in the “author guidelines” in the top jour-
nals, encourages researchers to concentrate on publishing theory and not
worry about the practical relevance of their work (Podolny, 2009; Tourish,

2020), beyond writing the two symbolic “implications for practice” para-
graphs at the end of the article (Bartunek and Rynes, 2010). According

to Kieser and Leiner (2009), the logics of organization and management
research and the logics of practices are so different that the gap is unbridge-
able. However, many contributions to this literature have taken a more
pragmatic stand and discussed various means of increasing the practical
relevance of organization and management research (Starkey and Madan,
2001; Lillis and Mundy, 2005; Reay et al., 2009; Sharma and Bansal, 2020:
Wickert et al., 2021).

I too contribute to the pragmatic approach by attempting to narrow the
rigor-relevance gap by extracting practical consequences of the translation
theory of knowledge transfer across organizational borders. The main argu-
ment is that translation theory has the potential to not only improve analysis
and understanding of knowledge transfer processes, but also to guide deliber-
ate interventions in such processes. This argument rests on a premise outlined
and empirically illustrated over the three previous chapters—that transla-
tion performance (which refers to how actors involved in knowledge transfers
gain and use knowledge about source and target contexts—and chose and
use various translation rules throughout knowledge transfer processes) are
often decisive for the outcomes of such transfer processes. As demonstrated


Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 215

in Chapter 6, involved actors’ translation performance may explain variations
in outcomes: It sometimes leads to successes and sometimes to failures, It is
also reasonable to suggest that involved actors’ translation performance is
influenced by their translation knowledge and skills. Thus, a key concept to
understand variations in actors’ translation performances is translation com-
petence, which refers to the sum of knowledge and skills that an involved actor
mobilizes and applies in acts of transferring knowledge across organizational
borders.

In addition to insights from the three foregoing chapters, the development
of this concept is also influenced by the corresponding defining salient feature
of translation competence within the source domain of translation studies
(see Chapter 3). Within that domain, four elements together shape a trans-
lators competence. The first is bilingualism, which means that the translator
ultimately must master both the source and the target language. The second
is the translator's knowledge of translation norms and rules, which means
possessing thorough knowledge about various translation rules and being
able to choose the rules that are the most appropriate in relation to concrete
translation challenges. The third is biculturalism, meaning that the transla-
tors knowledge of source and target should reach beyond knowledge of the

involved languages and include thorough knowledge of the source and target
contexts cultures. The fourth element is knowledge about the subject matter,

which means that a competent translator should be knowledgeable about the
substance of what is being translated. For example, if you translate a text about
modern electronic equipment, green technology, or cross-country skiing, the
quality of your translation is likely to gain increase if you are knowledgeable
about these certain subjects.

Building on these ideas and on insights from the three previous chapters, it
is reasonable to conceive of the translation competence of actors involved in
knowledge transfers as constituted by two features. The first is the translator’s
knowledge of contexts, which includes knowledge of practices to be trans-
ferred (the subject matter), as well as knowledge of relevant aspects of source
and target organizational contexts. The second is knowledge about transla-
tion rules and about how to select and use appropriate rules under various
conditions.

The rest of this chapter is organized into three sections. The first section
contains a discussion of translators knowledge of contexts, and the second
discusses their knowledge of—and the conditions for more deliberate use of
translation rules. The third and final section sums up the insights gained and
highlights the relationship between translators knowledge of contexts and

their knowledge and usage of translation rules.


216 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

Translators’ knowledge of contexts

Translators obviously need deep insights into the contexts between which

they mediate. The quality of such context knowledge has a determining
effect on the quality of a translation. Thus, outcomes of pg transfer
processes—successes and failures—can often be traced back to variations in
the involved translators’ knowledge of contexts. Chapter 6 provides severa]
illustrations of the close linkages between context knowledge and transfer
outcomes. One of the common features of the three most successful transfer
processes highlighted there—the McDonalds’ replication case, the coworker
dialogue case, and the co-production case—Was that the involved translators

were highly knowledgeable about the respective contexts. On the contrary,
in two of the three cases where the transfer processes failed (the transfer of
Taylorism to U.K. coal mines, and the transfer of modern fishing technol-

ogy to Kerala), the translators lacked thorough knowledge about the target

contexts.
The need for translators to be knowledgeable about source and target

contexts may seem so obvious that it hardly needs mentioning. However,
there are still several whats, hows, and whys to be answered in connection
with the translators’ knowledge of contexts. When assessing conditions for
developing translation competence, the why question should be answered by
stressing that thorough knowledge of contexts is a prerequisite for involved
actors to make (more) deliberate choices of translation rules to apply. For
example, a striking common feature of the three successful knowledge trans-
fer cases mentioned above was that the choices of appropriate translation
rules were premised on the involved translators’ thorough knowledge of con-
texts. Correspondingly, in the transfer failure cases, the choices and applica-
tion of inappropriate translation rules followed translators’ poor knowledge
of contexts.

The quality of translators’ knowledge of contexts—what and how much
they need to know—can be conceptualized in terms of the viscosity and
the velocity of the knowledge (Davenport and Prusak, 1998). These are
metaphors that have been imported from physics and applied to knowledge
management. Viscosity is a quantitative measure of a fluid’s resistance to flow,
and velocity is an expression of the speed at which a fluid flows. In analy-
sis of knowledge transfers, viscosity refers to the richness (or thickness) of
the knowledge to be transferred, while velocity refers to the speed at which
knowledge moves across and through organizations. For example, highly vis-
cous knowledge can be tacit, but highly critical knowledge about how to
perform a certain successful practice—and deeply embedded in the source


Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 217

context (Dhanaraj et al., 2004; Bacon et al, 2019). Such knowledge is often
characterized by low velocity, meaning it is hard to move at all, let alone fast.
Bluntly, the challenge for knowledge translators is sometimes “to fight against
physical laws,’ meaning to try to overview and gain source-based knowledge
of high viscosity, make representations of it, and make sudden swifts between
source and target contexts to arrive at the most appropriate target context
version of it.

Translators face two challenges related to the viscosity and the velocity of
the knowledge in the contexts. These are the challenges of gaining knowl-
edge of various viscosity, and of securing velocity through bilingualism and
biculturalism.

Gaining knowledge of contexts

A key part of involved actors’ translation competence is the competence to
decontextualize, or dis-embed; that is, to identify and make a representa-
tion of the desired source practice that accounts for the way it works in the
source organizational context. Another is the competence to contextualize;
that is, to re-embed the representation of the desired source practice in a
version that works in the target organizational context. A prerequisite for
building such competence is that the translator is able to gain knowledge
about the source and the target contexts. How challenging it is for a trans-
lator to gain knowledge about a practice to be transferred and its context
depends on certain features of the practice/context—and on features of the
translator.

The central feature of the desired source practice is its degree of trans-
latability (the extent to which a certain practice can be translated to an
abstract representation without excluding the elements required for how it
functions in the source organizational context). As outlined in Chapter 4,
three variables are decisive for the translatability of a practice. The first is
complexity, which consists of two intertwined aspects. One is the human-
technology aspect. As proposed in Chapter 4 (proposition 4.1), “The higher
the number of individuals involved in the accomplishment of a practice, and
the more the accomplishment is dependent upon tight mutual coordinated
actions among those involved, the more the translatability of the practice

decreases.’
The other aspect with implications for translatability is the technologi-

cal base of a practice. It is proposed (proposition 4.2.) that the more the
accomplishment of a practice is based on a technology with a clear-cut


218 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

lication, and the less it involves human individuals, the more the pract; ces
appli 6

translatability increases. The second aspect that — ein Å sine
is the degree of causal ambiguity. It has been propo p å Å | at

| ambiguity of a source practice influences t e practices translatabjj.
å n då v at ambiguous the linkages between input factors and results

the harder it is to translate the practice to a representation that accounts for

ials for how it works. +1: ce |
on ‘second variable that defines the translatability of a practice is embed.

dedness, which refers to the extent to which the knowledge and capabilities
that constitute a desired source practice are anchored in its om and/or
interorganizational contexts. It is proposed nen a t DEG More
the knowledge base of a desired practice IS dispersed and em ec ded in
interorganizational networks at different places, the more challenging it is
to demarcate and the harder it is to translate to a high-fidelity representa-
tion. Further, the more a desired practices knowledge base is embedded in
organizational elements, such as technologies, tasks, individuals and social
relations, the harder it is to dis-embed and translate to a high-fidelity repre-
sentation. The third variable to define translatability is explicitness; that is, the
degree to which knowledge of a desired practice is codified, verbalized, and
well articulated. It is proposed (proposition 4.7) that the more explicit (codi-
fied and verbalized) a desired source practice is, the higher its translatability.
Correspondingly, the less explicit the knowledge base of a desired prac-
tice, the lower its translatability—and the higher the chances of losing ele-
ments that are essential for the functioning of the practice in the translation
process,

The central argument of translatability can be summed up as follows: the
more complex, more embedded, and tacit a desired practice is, the lower its
translatability and the higher its viscosity.

Translators also face challenges of gaining knowledge about target contexts,
Translatability of the target context refers to how easy or difficult it is for the
translator to gain accurate knowledge about the target context. It is especially
important for translators to gain knowledge about existing target practices
that may be affected by and/or may affect a source practice representation
that is determined to be implemented and contextualized. Such knowledge
is necessary in order for the translator to arrive at a version of the source
practice that fits in with and works in the target organization. As outlined in
Chapter 4, the translatability of the existing target practices is—like the trans-

latability of the source practice—determined by their degree of complexity,
embeddedness, and explicitness,


Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 219

Two features of the translator seem to be important for their chances of
gaining insights into desired source practices: their localization and their
relationships to the source organization.

Outside-located translators. Translators are sometimes located outside and
are nonmembers of the source organizations. For example, they may be
consulting companies engaged in identifying, selling, and spreading best
practices in various fields. However, an outside and distant localization
normally limits translators’ possibilities of gaining knowledge about source
contexts, and especially about practices of low translatability (Wellstein and
Kieser, (2011). Research indicates that access to source context knowledge
depends on trustful relationships (Levin and Cross, 2004), and that transla-
tors who represent potential competitors will have limited access—especially
to knowledge of high viscosity and value for competitiveness (Norman, 2002;
Hackney et al., 2005; Rouyre and Fernandez, 2019). Likewise, translators
acting in the role of expatriates (employees who come from a parent orga-
nization and work for a while in a subsidiary unit) have higher chances of
identifying and gaining knowledge about eventually successful practices in
the subsidiary.

Inside-located translators. Translators can be insiders; that is, actors who
are based within the source organization. They normally have good access to
the knowledge base of source practices and especially to practices in which
they are directly involved. Thus, insiders possess thicker and more viscous
knowledge about source practices than outsiders. However, the challenge is
to combine viscosity with velocity; that is, to move the insiders’ rich knowl-
edge across organizational borders to target units. Efforts to do so frequently
fail (Foos et al., 2006; Seidler-de Alwis and Hartmann, 2008). Davenport
and Prusak (1998) provided an illuminating example from the Mobil Oil
Company. The company’s engineers had developed an innovative method
to determine exactly the volume of steam required for drilling under various
conditions. This was a very valuable method because the company could save
steam, buy less, and thereby make huge returns. Thus, this knowledge had the
potential to greatly increase Mobils competitiveness in the drilling market.
However, the technology was sophisticated and the use of it required thor-
ough knowledge and training of the drilling operators. The leaders of Mobil
Oil were eager to quickly transfer the new technology to the various drilling
units and have the steam-saving method implemented. To speed up the trans-
fer (increase velocity), the headquarters sent a memo to all units, describing
the procedures to be followed and their benefits—and asked for an immedi-
ate change of practice. However, the implementation rate was very slow; in
fact, nothing happened. The company’s evaluation concluded that the reason


220 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

for the transfer failure was that chosen memo form was too simple to mediate

the highly viscous knowledge of the new drilling technology.

edge across organizational borders is to involve insiders from the source
context directly in the transfer process. Westney and Piekkari (2020) showed
how such an approach has been widely used to move knowledge of various
production practices from Japanese firmstothe United States. The early 1 9708
was the start of a period with massive setup of Japanese subsidiaries in the
United States—most of them production units staffed with Japanese man.
agers and engineers and American workers. The way the Japanese moved the
production knowledge from the Japanese parent companies to their Amer-
ican factories was mainly through what Westney and Piekkari (2020) called
“direct translation” The translators were Japanese insiders; that is, Japanese
expatriates both managers and factory-floor operatives. The knowledge was
transferred directly, mainly on the production unit floors from the Japanese
to the American workers—often by “showing,” which means demonstrating
how certain work operations should be performed rather than by “telling”
due to the problems that the involved actors had communicating across the
Japanese-American language barrier. Thus, the concept of “direct transla-
tion” means translation from practice in the source organization to practice
in the recipient organization. By this approach, complex and viscous knowl-
edge could be transferred relatively quickly to and implemented by the target
organization.

Combining knowledge of source and recipient contexts

Bilingualism and biculturalism

Within translation studies, a key feature of translation competence is bilin-
gualism, which means that the translator is knowledgeable about both the
source and the target language and can understand and express her/himself
with ease in both languages (Macnamara, 1967; Shreve, 2012). In addition
to being bilingual, a competent translator should also be bicultural, which
means being knowledgeable about the societal source context from which
the text stems—and about the societal target context (Witte, 1987; Vermeer,
1998; Ringberg, et al., 2010; Lörscher, 2012). Although arguments of the need
for bilingualism/biculturalism are most clearly spelled out and associated

with linguistics (Grosjean, 1982; 2010), its scope reaches far beyond linguis-
tics and includes communication and mediation of messages across various

borders in general, as well as knowledge transfers between organizations.


Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 221

It requires that the mediator/translator relates to—and therefore has some
knowledge of—both source and recipient contexts. The translation theo-

rist James Holmes described bilingualism/biculturalism as the translator's
consciousness of two maps:

| have suggested that actually the translation process is a multi-level process; while
we are translating sentences, we have a map of the original text in our minds and at
the same time, a map of the kind of text we want to produce in the target language.
Even as we translate serially, we have this structural concept so that each sentence
in our translation is determined not only by the sentence in the original but by the

two maps of the original text and the translated text which we are carrying along
as we translate. (Holmes, 1972/1988: 96)

The research literature differs and exposes disagreements when it comes to
defining the phenomenon of bilingualism. One position reserves bilingual-
ism to instances where an individual has perfect mastery of two languages
and their contexts. The knowledge and mastery should be so thorough that
the bilingual is considered a native in both languages/contexts (Halliday et al.,
1964). At the opposite extreme of perfect bilingualism are definitions that
tend to include in this concept almost all abilities to express a complete utter-

ance in a language other than one’s mother tongue (Haugen, 1956; Lorscher,
2012).

Cognitive processes and translation competence

Why is bilingualism/biculturalism—the combination of knowledge of both
source and target contexts—a required component in translation compe-
tence? The common-sense answer is that an actor who wants to translate
obviously needs at least two parts to mediate between—and also needs a
minimum of knowledge of both to be able to understand the source ver-
sion and to render it and make it understandable in the target context. A
much more complex approach (1) takes into account the highly intertwined
cognitive processes involved in translations; further (2) reveals the links
between some especially “productive” cognitive processes and bilingual-
ism/biculturalism; and then (3) highlights the connection between degree of
bilingualism/biculturalism involved in a translation—and the quality of the
actual translation.

Numerous cognitive processes are involved in a translation process per-
formed by bilingual actors. However, such processes are hard to research and
make clear representations of, partly due to the extreme complexity of the
ways in which they are interwoven, and partly because they are not amenable


222 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

to direct observations (Seleskovitch 1978a; Dechert and Jandrock, 1986; Par.
adis. 2004: Rothe-Neves, 2007; Albir and Alvarez, 2009). This means that
there still are many white spots on the map. For example, researchers still

lack thorough knowledge about processes involved in translators’ Storing
and retrieving of knowledge of source and target contexts when translat.

ing between them (Pearson and Fernandez, 1994). While some scholars have
postulated a two-store model, meaning that knowledge of the two contexts
are stored in “maps” at two different places in the brain (Fabbro, 2001), pro.
ponents of one-store models argue that knowledge of both contexts is stored

in the same cortex area (Price et al., 1999).
However, there seems to be general agreement among researchers that the

cognitive processes involved in acts of translations can be subsumed under
three main and interrelated phases (Seleskovitch, 197 8b; Lederer, 1994/ 2003:
Alvez and Albir, 2017). The first is to understand the source contexts and the
message to be translated, activating an array of complex cognitive processes
to make sense of the message and its contexts. The processes triggered in

sensemaking also mobilize and interfere with processes of cognitive memory
(“have I (the translator) seen or heard this before?” )—both short- and long-

term memory (Kroll and Stewart, 1994). The second phase is de-verbalization,
At this intermediate stage between understanding and re-expression, various
cognitive processes are activated to extract the pure meaning of the source
message (Gile, 1990). The third phase is re-expression, which is expressing the
source version in another language. This phase activates numerous cognitive
processes (such as attention, perception, memorizing, selecting, and decid-
ing) to arrive at an acceptable target version of the source version (Alvez and

Albir, 2017).

In the listing of cognitive processes involved in translation processes
one may get the impression that these are sequenced, linear processes that
unfold within the translation period. However, the cognitive translation
processes are not constrained by a sequential logic. Instead, they are non-
linear and highly interconnected processes that run simultaneously—and at
an extremely high speed. More than being one-directional and sequenced,
cognitions involved in translations are alternating processes where the trans-
lator mentally oscillates, at high speed, between the source and the target
context—a logic of iteration that successively may lead to an even more
appropriate and high-quality translated version. Thus, the individual bilin-
gual/bicultural translator has the capacity to cognitively move large amounts
of information instantly (or with high velocity (Davenport and Prusak,
1998))—between her/his mental maps of source and target contexts. Such
high-velocity alternations are a premise for key translation processes of


Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 223

relating, confronting, blending, and balancing the bodies of knowledge from
the source and target contexts (Pym, 2004), and thus for arriving at an appro-
priate target version of a desired source text/practice. However, in addition to
high-velocity mental commuting processes, the quality of the translation also
depends on viscosity; that is, the thoroughness and quality of the knowledge
that the bilingual/bicultural translator possesses and combines of both the
source and the target—including knowledge of the desired source practice to
be transferred and translated. Thus, the following proposition:

Proposition 7.1. The more the translator possesses and combines high-viscosity
knowleage about the source contexts, the desired source practice, and the recipient
context, the more likely it is that the translated version will account for the essentials
of the desired source practice and be appropriately adjusted to the recipient context.

Bilingualism as a variable in knowledge transfers

What makes bilingualism/biculturalism a possible unique and necessary
ingredient of translation competence—both in linguistic translations and
in the transfer of knowledge across organizational borders—is the potential
to combine high-viscosity knowledge of both contexts—with high velocity
iterative moves across the translator's mental maps (or “lexicons’) of the
contexts. It is important to recall that the capacity of making extremely high-
velocity mental oscillations between source and target contexts is embodied
in—and is therefore a key feature of the individual translator. In linguis-
tic translations, the common and institutionalized practice is the individual
translator who alone performs the entire translation. However, in knowledge
transfers between organizations bilingualism is better conceived of as a scarce
resource and a variable. Thus, there are high—as well as medium and low
levels of bilingualism. Obviously, there are examples of single actors possess-
ing high levels of bilingual/bicultural translation competence who operate
as translators in knowledge transfers across organizational borders. One of
the six knowledge transfer cases discussed in Chapter 6 involved a typical
bilingual/bicultural translator. That was Ray Kroc, who in the early 1950s
replicated a certain hamburger restaurant and made the worlds largest fast-
food franchising organization. Kroc had firsthand and detailed knowledge
about the source, which was the McDonald brothers’ hamburger restaurant
in San Bernardino, California. Kroc combined that knowledge with his thor-
ough knowledge of trends in the fast-food market in the United States. He

also invested much energy in trying to get to know personally each relevant
candidate who wished to become a MacDonald’s franchisee. Kroc's extensive

224 —A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

knowledge of both source and target contexts was undoubtedly an important

reason behind the success of his replication strategy. |
However, even in language translation of texts most translators do not

manage to live up to the ‘deal of full bilingualism with total mastery of both
the source and the target language. Historically, most language translators
and interpreters are medium bilingual. Often they are more knowledgeable

about the target language

belong to—and have their mother tongue | |
1998: 13-14). High level of bilingualism is even more infrequent in know]-

edge transfer between organizations than in linguistic translations. Few
actors possess the knowledge needed to master thoroughly more than either
the source or the recipient context (Levina and Vaast, 2005)—especially in
knowledge transfers between separate and independent organizations, One
example of medium bilingualism is the making of the Norwegian coworker

dialogue as a translation of U.S.-based performance and counseling systems
(see Chapter 6). Although a successful transfer, the Norwegian translators

possessed significantly more viscous knowledge about the Norwegian than

about the American organizational contexts.
Sometimes bilingualism is low, almost absent—such as in cases where

external actors mediate between source and target contexts without possess-
ing firsthand high-viscous knowledge of none of them. For example, large
consulting houses are described as “knowledge systems” (Werr and Stjerberg,
2003) that regularly span and transfer knowledge between different orga-
nizational contexts (Suddaby and Greenwood, 2001). However, observers
have questioned external consultants’ knowledge of the contexts they mediate
between (O'Shea and Madigan, 1997; Armbriister, 2006; Røvik, 2007).
Ihere is a striking difference between translation of language/texts and
translation of knowledge across organizational borders. While text transla-
tions are mostly conducted by one single translator, knowledge mediation
across organizations often resembles complex ecologies of several, diverse,
shifting, and variously interconnected and coordinated groups of actors—
such as authors of popular management books (Furusten, 1999), external
consultants (Clark and Fincham, 2002), internal consultants (Sturdy and
Wright, 2011), HRM staff (Iles et al., 2004), R&D staff (van Gils et al., 2009),
shop-floor workers (Letmathe et al., 2012), and managers at various lev-
els (Radaelli and Sitton-Kent, 2016), both in the source and the recipient
organization. This implies that individual translators are often part-time par-
ticipants who are involved in limited sequences of the transfer process. It
also means that actors involved in contextualization processes in the tar-
get organization sometimes are others than those involved in processes of


Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 225

decontextualization in the source organization. Thus, under such conditions

the potential quality of bilingualism in knowledge transfers—that is, the
capability of combining high viscosity (thick knowledge of source organiza-
tion, desired practice and recipient organization), with high velocity (speed
of iterative moves between translator’s mental maps of source and target

contexts)—may suffer and even get lost. Real bilingualism in knowledge
transfers is scarce and hard to obtain (Lazarova and Tarique, 2005; Burmeis-
ter and Deller, 2016; Waardenburg et al., 2022). However, organizations can
take efforts to avoid maximum loss of bilingual capability by organizing for
pseudo- bilingualism in knowledge transfers, A route to such bilingualism is to
establish a team consisting of actors from both the recipient and the source

context (Peal and Lambert, 1962) who together possess knowledge of high
viscosity about both contexts and the desired source practice.

Deliberate usage of translation rules

The second pillar of translation competence—in addition to translators
knowledge of source and recipient contexts—is their knowledge and usage of
translation rules. There are translation rules, which were described and typol-
ogized in Chapter 5. Translation rules can be deliberately selected to achieve
certain effects, or they can be taken for granted and just followed. Regard-
less of the level of rationality upon which the choice of particular translation
rules is premised, the use of a rule will have consequences for outcomes of
knowledge transfer processes. For example, the effects of choosing and using
various translation rules are clearly demonstrated in the six knowledge trans-
fer cases presented in Chapter 6. A key question concerning this pillar of
translation competence is how and to what extent it is possible to increase
the chances for translators to more deliberately chose translation rules.

Scope conditions of translation rules

The above arguments point to the need to specify the translation rules’ “scope
conditions”—a concept that stems from the philosophy of science (Toul-
min 1953/1967; Popper, 1959), which means making statements that serve
to define and constrain the circumstances in which a theory is applica-
ble (Cohen, 1989: 83). While it sometimes might be possible to formulate
almost universal applicable theories within physical science, it is impossible
to outline such theories within the human sciences, including the science of

EE SETE ee

ually claim that they have discovered Unive
re

sal applicable social scientific laws will immediately be met with tegt result,

that contradict them (Walker and Cohen, ir Uddaby
(2010) has concentrated especially on the po ae dy Oundary jinn,
its, of “theoretical constructs” within organiza 0 | ory. The tyPology ’
translation rules contains a set of such theoretical constructs, In contra

to physical science, organizational constructs lack universality, Thy. «

very important for theorists to

' » Under
which a proposed construct will or will not adhere” (Suddaby, 2019, 3 49)

Suddaby warned against overgeneralization and claims of universality Of the.
oretical constructs. The way to avoid this is by placing Scope conditions On
the constructs, which means carefully outlining their boundary limits.

Specifying the translation rules scope conditions, or their range of app}.
cation, means theorizing the conditions under which it will be r fasonable, or
unreasonable, to apply which rules. If we are able to define some of the SCOpe
conditions for the outlined translation rules, it can be useful Knowledge with
the potential to guide the choices of translators (in other words, practition.
ers) who are involved in knowledge transfer processes across Organizational
borders. Being aware of the complex ecologies of such processes (Wedlin and
Sahlin, 2017; Westney and Piekkari, 2020), which makes it hard to identify
and outline more than just parts of each translation rule's scope condition,
I have deliberately written “some” (scope conditions). Thus, efforts to out.
line the translation rules’ range of applicability start here, while keeping in
mind Whetten’s (1989) argument that the “who, the where, and the whey’
of a theory are usually discovered and refined through subsequent empirical
research, which means that defining theoretical constructs’ scope conditions
is an enduring task.

At the most general level, the scope conditions of a construct should be

defined in relation to its applicability in space and time. However, these are
very broad categories. Thus, this chapter zooms in at a more operational-

ized level of analysis. Attempts to trace translation rules’ scope conditions are
based on close readings of the vast literature on knowledge transfer studies,
and especially on observations of the usage of translation rules in trans-
fers that respectively lead to appropriate and inappropriate outcomes. These

observations center around two key elements of knowledge transfer pro-
cesses, which is (a) the source, as well as (b) the recipient and its relation

to the source. Numerous studies and observations indicate that specific fea-

tures of these two elements represent important conditions for translators
involved in knowledge transfers in various organizational contexts and who

search for the most appropriate translation rules. The key features of each

Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 227

of the two elements are defined below, followed by an outline of the scope
conditions for each translation rule in relation to these features.

Features of the source

The source context—that is, where a desired practice is located and the
ways it varies—constitute an important condition that influences the appro-
priateness of each translation rule, The key variable of source contexts is
translatability, which is the extent to which a desired practice can be trans-
lated into an abstract representation that includes the essential elements for
how it functions in the source context. More specifically, translatability is
defined as a source practice's degree of explicitness (tacit and noncodified
versus verbalized and codified), complexity (the technological vs the human
component, in addition to the degree of causal ambiguity), and embedded-
ness (whether the knowledge base is dispersed and ingrained in intra- and /or
interorganizational networks, or concentrated and thus, easier to demarcate).
The translatability of a source practice varies between high, in cases with high

explicitness, low complexity, and low embeddedness, and low, in cases where
the desired practice is tacit, complex, and embedded.

Features of the relation between recipient and source.

Certain aspects of the recipient and its relation to the source may be deci-
sive for the appropriateness of the various translation rules. The key variable
is similarity, which is the extent to which the recipient and the source con-
text differ or resemble each other in certain respects. Studies of language
translation have verified that the greater the difference between recipient
and source language contexts, the harder it is to arrive at proper translations
(House, 2006; Dohan and Levintova, 2007). Recipient and source contexts
can be similar or different in many ways, which can influence the transfer-
ability of knowledge between them. An important condition with impacts
on the transferability is whether both the source and the recipient units
belong to the same large organization. Within the resource-based view of
the firm (Barney 1991; Kogut and Zander, 1993) a central insight is that
intra-organizational knowledge transfer is, on average, easier than trans-
fer across separate organizations (Tsang, 2002). ‘Thus, a main driving force
behind the establishment of multinational corporations is that it reduces fric-
tion and eases cross-unit knowledge transfers. Much research has focused
upon and found effects of knowledge transfers of source and recipient units
being located in similar/different cultures (Strang and Meyer, 1993; Javidan
et al., 2005; Kayes et al., 2005; Lucas, 2006). Other researchers have focused
specifically on the degree of similarity/difference of national cultures—and

a 5 > ee er eg "00% ee ae == — —_— = pa


938 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

nt knowledge transfers (Kedia and Bhagat, 1988.
f the main findings of such studies jg that
ansfers decreases with increased National

cultural differences between sources and recipients, while simultaneously
increasing with increased national culture similarity. Another stream of styd.

‘es has focused on the effects on knowledge transfers of similarity/ differences
between nation’s institutional arrangements (Kostova, 1999; Dikova and Van
Witteloostuijn, 2007). For example, Kostova (1999) argued that the likelihogg
of having transferred practices implemented depends on the extent to which
the institutional arrangements, such as public regulations, laws, and formal
rules, is similar or different in the source and recipient country contexts,
One insight from the above-mentioned studies that corresponds to the
insights from translation studies is that the greater the difference between
the recipient and source organizational contexts, the more challenging the

knowledge transfer processes. Conversely, the more similar source and recip-
‘ents contexts are in terms of the variables mentioned above, the easier the

knowledge transfer process will be.
In what follows, the scope conditions of each of the main translation rules

(the reproducing mode, the modifying mode, and the radical mode) are dis-
cussed and clarified in relation to the two key variables: translatability and

similarity.

their effect on source-recipie
Kogut and Singh, 1988). One 0
the effectiveness of knowledge tr

Scope conditions: The reproducing mode

Translatability and copying
Reproduction or copying as å translation rule refers to acts of replicating with

great exactitude an identified desired source practice in one or more recipi-
ent organizations. The dominating motivation behind copying is to achieve
successful outcomes by recreating and repeating in the recipient the ele-
ments that constitute the desired source practice (Nelson and Winter, 1982:
Winter et al., 2012). However, successful copying is associated with certain
scope conditions. These are conditions that are considerably influenced by
the translatability of the desired source practice. Specifically, there are two
required conditions of copying that vary with the degree of translatability.
One is the need for the translator to know what to copy. In other words,
copying requires a relatively clear and stable template. Thus, under conditions
where a desired source practice is characterized by low translatability (such as
tacit, nonverbalized practice, complex relationships among a high number of
involved actors who together carry out the practice and, perhaps, which result


Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 229

in unclear cause-effect chains), it is hard for the translator to arrive at a clear
image of a template to copy. The other condition that influences the appropri-
ateness of copying is translators’ access to additional information about the
desired practice. As noted in Chapter 5, it is widely believed—especially in
the Western world—that copying is rather simple and that it is usually quickly
done—such as imaging an object by using a cell phone to take a picture of it.
However, numerous observations and studies indicate that copying is a com-
plex and enduring task, In contrast to the simplicity of taking a cell phone
photo, good copying often requires a time-consuming process of learning.
Thus, in the renowned Japanese culture of copying, the linguistic term for
copying, manebu, has almost the same meaning as “learning” and is referred
to as manabu (Clarence-Smith, 2007: 56).

Acknowledging that copying is hard and enduring work, a translator who
attempts to copy needs good access to information about the desired source

practice, At its best, an act of copying proceeds as an iterative process where
the translator commutes between confronting and learning about the tem-
plate, on one hand, and, on the other hand, engaging in filling out his/her
copied version of it, and gradually arriving at a more refined high-fidelity
copy of the desired source practice. Thus, access to the template is a very
important condition for the translator. In fact, such access can sometimes
compensate for low translatability in the first place (Inkpen, 2000). However,
even in situations where the translatability of a desired source practice is low,
and access to additional information is restricted, external located organiza-
tions/actors will sometimes take the risk of trying to copy the practice. Such
risk-taking copying can be based on insights and reasoning that the value of
tacit and uncodified knowledge is often higher and has more potential to gain
competitive advantage than what is the case with practices based on codified,
explicit, and more accessible knowledge. In such cases, the risk of copying
failures increases. Thus, I offer the following proposition:

Proposition 7.2. The lower the translatability of a desired source practice and the
more that access to additional information about the practice is restricted for
outside-located organizations and potential adopters, the less appropriate copying
will be as a translation rule.

The above arguments indicate that the appropriateness of copying as a trans-
lation rule depends on the translatability of the template and on the transla-
tors’ access to information about it. Thus, instances of high translatability of
desired source practices and of good translator-access to additional informa-
tion about it provide good conditions for copying. An example, outlined more


edge Transfer

translation acts by Ray Kroc, who SUCCES,

taurant as template fro |
hers’ hamburger rester” | M whi
used the McDonald brot F replicas. A key premise for Kroc’s replication

large number 0 a
he made | ; nad a clear and stable template, and almost NO restriction, å
cess was that he gaining additional information throughoy, the

fronting it and |
id kn and refining the replica hamburger restaurants

This leads to the next proposition.

ty of a desired source practice—in combination

tion 7.3. High translatabili 7 ) |
Propositio g r’s access to additional information about the

with few restrictions on translato

practice—increase the appropriateness of copying as a translation rule,

As noted above, it is important that translators have opportunities to gain
additional information about the desired source practice—and it can even
compensate for a situation in which the translatability of the desired source
practice is low. This can often be the case, for example, In attempts to transfer
knowledge between units within large multinational corporations, Although

an identified good practice in a certain unit may have low translatability
in the first place, translators in other units have almost unrestricted access

to gain additional information about it—and thus, to thereby increase its
translatability and the appropriateness of copying.

Proposition 7.4. Low translatability of a desired source practice in the first place can
be compensated by few restrictions on translators’ access to gain additional informa.
tion about the practice, and subsequently increase the appropriateness of applying
copying as a translation rule.

Similarity and copying

In addition to the translatability of the desired source practice, the degree of
similarity between the source and the recipient contexts represents another
important condition that may be decisive for the appropriateness of applying

copying as translation rule. The basic argument is that the more dissimilar
the source and the recipient contexts, the more risky it becomes to copy,


Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 231

a source in a rather dissimilar organizational context—is dependent upon
noncodified context-specific factors. Therefore, a translator who aims to
translate a desired practice from such a context may make inferences about
the importance of the relative similarity between source and recipient con-
texts, without knowing exactly how and to what extent the functioning of the
concrete source practice depends on its local context (Rovik, 2016: 301), and
avoid copying in such cases,

Obviously, a source and a recipient organization can be similar/dissimilar
in numerous ways. However, some features, or variables of similarity, are
more important than others in defining the scope conditions of the reproduc-
ing mode and copying. In searching for such critical variables, it is reasonable
to consider the entirety of knowledge transfer studies and concentrate on
insights from various studies of knowledge transfer barriers. From such
studies three variables seem to be of especial relevance to define scope con-
dition of copying: corporate culture distance, national culture distance, and
institutional distance.

Corporate culture distance. Hofstede et al. (2010) defined the concept of
culture as “the collective programming of the mind that distinguishes the
members of one group or category of people from others” (p. 6). There are
many possible “categories” of culture. Among the most frequently referred
to categories are organizational or corporate culture, and national culture.
These are very different, but also highly interesting, categories when defining

the scope conditions of translation rules.
Corporate culture includes implied but not expressed beliefs, assumptions,

and customs that affect how members make sense of phenomena and how
they act (Schein, 1985; De Long and Fahey, 2000). Research indicates that
increased cultural dissimilarity may hamper knowledge transfers between
source and recipient organizations (Shenkar et. al., 2008; Beugdelsdijk et al.,
2018). Hardly discernable cultural elements can be involved in the ways a
desired source practice is performed (Wenger and Snyder, 2000; De Long and
Fahey, 2000). Therefore, with increasing corporate cultural distance, the risk
of failing increases if the translator aims to copy the desired source practice.

Proposition 7.5. The more dissimilar source and recipient corporate cultures, the
more likely that any cultural-specific elements inherent in the desired source prac-
tice will not “fit” in the recipient organizations, and the less appropriate copying will

be as a translation rule.

The proposed connection between high corporate culture distance and
reduced appropriateness of copying as translation rule can be modified in

— — =>" => ewe > ~


232 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

| ‘pient-based translators to gain addi:
cases of increased access for recipient-b al 8 ditiona
information about the desired source practice. UO y:

Proposition 7.6. The more similar source and recipient corporate cultures are the
more likely it is that any cultural-specific elements inherent in the desired Source

practice will fit with the recipient organizations, and the more appropriate copying

will be as a translation rule.

National culture distance. In addition to organizations, nations are the Other
main entity that fall into Hofstede et al.s (2010) definition of culture as the
collective programming of the mind that distinguishes the members of One
group or category from others. In speaking of national culture, the cate-
gory is "nation;” which refers to the norms, beliefs, behaviors, customs, and
values shared by the population in a sovereign nation. Certain features dis.
tinguish organizational cultures from national cultures. While membership
of an organization (and, thus, its culture) is usually limited in time and space,
membership of a nation is usually established at birth and is often permanent
In two large research projects, Hofstede (1980) and Hofstede et al. ( 1990)
described and compared national cultures in nearly 100 countries in relation
to the following six value dimensions: (1) power distance, related to solutions
to the basic problems of human inequality; (2) uncertainty avoidance, related
to level of stress in a society on the face of an unknown future; (3) individy.
alism versus collectivism; (4) masculinity versus femininity; (5) long-term
versus short-term orientation, related to the choice of focus of peoples
efforts: the future or the present and past; and further (6) indulgence versus
restraint, related to the extent of gratification of human desires for enjoying
life.

By comparing nations according to their scores on these dimensions, a
complex pattern emerges of similar and dissimilar national cultures, For
example, there are very high scores for high power distance for Latin Amer-
ica, Asian countries, and Africa. The United States is in the middle, while
Sweden and Denmark are characterized by low power distance. The value of
individualism is very high in the United States, in Australia, and in Great
Britain, while collectivism is high in nations such as Sweden, Serbia, and
Portugal.

Research shows that differences in national cultures influence knowl-
edge transfer processes, and especially dissimilarities related to individual-
ism/collectivism and degrees of power distance (Lucas, 2006; Chen et al.,
2010). Translators should be cautious about trying to copy a desired source


Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 233

practice in cases where the source and recipient are located in very differ-
ent national cultures. The risk of including culturally biased elements in the

copy that do not fit with the recipient increases with increasing differences in
national cultures.

Proposition 7.7. The more dissimilar the national cultures of source and recipient
organizations, the more likely it is that the desired source practice contains national

culture-biased elements that do not fit in with the recipient—and the less appropriate
copying will be as a translation rule.

Conversely:

Proposition 7.8. The more similar the national cultures of source and recipient orga-
nizations, the more likely it is that national culture-biased elements inherent in
the desired source practice will eventually fit in with the recipient—and the more
appropriate copying will be as a translation rule.

Institutional distance. The concept of "institutional distance” was coined and
developed by Kostova in the late 1990s (Kostova, 1997; 1999), and refers to the
differences/similarities between two countries according to their regulatory,
cognitive, and normative institutions. The regulatory pillar encompasses a
country's laws, formal rules, and regulations, and includes typical activities
such as rule setting, monitoring, and sanctioning. The regulatory aspect of
a country may come to expression in various ways, such as in typical fea-
tures of the formal structure, procedures, and routines of the country’s public
administration.

Institutional distance is an important variable when theorizing the scope
condition of knowledge translation rules, including the reproducing mode
and the rule of copying. Especially interesting is the regulatory pillar, partly
because it is the most researched of the three pillars (Kostova et al., 2020:
474), but mainly because the two others—the cognitive and the normative
pillars—overlap to some extent with definitions and insights already taken
care of within the literature of corporate and national cultural distance (Kos-
tova, 1999: 314). Somewhat surprisingly, there are relatively few studies of
the effects of regulatory distance, and even fewer of how regulatory distance
affects knowledge transfers (For example, in their studies of the effects of
institutional distance on knowledge transfer, both Kostova (1999) and Jensen
and Szulanski (2004) left out regulatory distance). However, it is reasonable
to suggest that regulatory distance is an important variable in knowledge
transfers, Countries differ greatly on the regulatory variable. Thus, more


234 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

able to suggest that the functioning of a desired source
rules, and institutions that regulate polit.

s within a host country. Such dependen.
based translators as they are often hard
latory conditions in the host country of

specifically, it is reason
practice may depend partly on laws,
ical, social, and economic condition
cies can be challenging for recipient-

to discover and may not fit with regu | |
the recipient. Therefore, it can be risky to apply copying as a translation rule

since the desired source practice may require certain regulative Conditions

that are not present in the home country of the recipient. Thus, the following

proposition:

Proposition 7.9. The more dissimilar the regulatory condition of the host country of
the source organization and the recipient organization, the more likely it is that any
dependencies of country-specific regulations for the functioning of the desired source
practice will not fit with the regulative conditions in the recipient country—and the

less appropriate copying will be as a translation rule.

Summing up. Some scope conditions of a reproducing translation mode
(copying) have been defined above according to certain features of the rela-
tion between source and recipient contexts. It is argued that the more dissimi-
lar a source and a recipient are on three variables (corporate culture-distance,
national culture-distance, and regulatory distance), the more limited the
scope condition of copying. Conversely, increasing similarity between source
and recipient contexts on these variables tends to increase the appropriate-
ness of copying as a translation rule.

It has been suggested that the proposed connections between each of
the three types of dissimilarity and increasing limitation in the scope
conditions of copying can be modified and compensated by (a) the
extent to which recipient actors have access to gain additional informa-
tion about the desired source practice and its context, and (b) the extent
to which recipient actors de facto exploit such access to gain additional
information.

As mentioned earlier, the examination of the three “distance” variables
identifies some—but obviously not all—actual scope conditions of the repro-
ducing mode. Thus, “organizational type” is another promising variable to
further define the scope conditions of the reproducing mode construct. For
example, copying in cases of transfer of a desired source practice across differ-
ent industries can be challenging (Tell et al., 2017), as can transferring from
private sector to public sector organizations (Diefenbach, 2009).

Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 235

Scope conditions: The radical mode

As outlined in Chapter 5, the radical translation mode is featured by a
propensity of translators to act relatively unbounded by a source context
version when translating a recipient version of it. There are two main rea-
sons why recipient-based translators can be inclined to alter and thus make
versions that deviate severely from source practice versions. The first is the
notion that all knowledge transfers should be clearly related to the needs
of the recipient organization. Thus, the driving force of knowledge transfers
should be to solve problems in the recipient organization. Any transferred
practice should be domesticated according to this premise; that is, adapted
to be effective means of meeting defined, concrete challenges in the recip-
ient. Viewed from this perspective, the way in which such adopted and
adapted practices de facto work as problem-solving means in the recipient
is the key criteria to assess the outcome of the knowledge transfer. These

arguments correspond to similar arguments by Skopos theorists (Hönig and
Kufsmaul, 1982; Schaffner, 1998) and manipulation school theorists (Her-

mans, 1985/2014) within translation theory. Instead of adherence to the
source and living up to the ideal of searching for equivalence between the
recipient and the source version, they argued that the source text should not
determine the translation process. The function of a translation should be
determined by target context actors and their needs (Holz-Månttåri, 1984).

The other main reason why organizations can enter into a radical trans-
lation mode can be traced back to certain habits and traditions frequently
associated with Western values and ideals. The enduring Western world
project of progress towards higher levels of technological development, wel-
fare, and civilization is deeply rooted in the values of individualism, novelty,
inventions, and innovations (Meyer et al., 1997). The admiration for and
celebration of novelty and innovations go hand in hand with a correspond-
ing deep skepticism towards copycat culture and reproductions. However, as
outlined in Chapter 5, while there is a chronic shortage of real novelty and
simultaneously a rich supply of templates that could be imitated, organiza-
tions are tempted to radically transform imitations so that they stand out as
innovations.

It is important to keep these (and others) social mechanisms in mind when
defining scope conditions of the radical translation mode.

Translatability and radical translation
The translatability of a desired source practice constitutes important scope
conditions for radical translations and the rule of alteration. However, the


236 —A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

teration and its scope conditions set by the desire 4
lex. In cases with a desired source practice ¢

low translatability and with restricted access to gain additional information,
translators face a dilemma. Acknowledging that superior results and com.
petitive advantages often stem from knowledge that is tacit, complex, and
embedded in networks and cultures may encourage organizations to take
the chance of copying—even if the translatability is low and the template
blurry. This may lead to misinterpretations and copying failures, and thus,
to unintentional alteration and emergent of recipient versions that do nor
work (Babson, 1998). For example, most attempts to copy the success of Si].
icon Valley Science Park have failed (DesForges, 1986). However, in cases of
low translatability, alteration and radical translation can also be a deliber.
ately chosen translation rule. The less translatable a desired source practice is

(for example, one characterized with irreducible causal ambiguity), the more
sense it might make to conceptualize the available and limited information

about such practices as rough templates and sources of inspiration that can
be altered and radically mixed and transformed (Rovik, 2016), thereby cre.
ating something new under the inspiration of something that already exists
(Alchian, 1950; Erlingsdottir and Lindberg, 2005). In propositional form:

relationship between al
practice's translatability is comp

Proposition 7.10. The lowerthe translatability of a desired source practice (thats, the
more tacit, complex and embedded it is), the more a radical translation will become

an appropriate translation rule.

Conversely, it is suggested that increasing the translatability of the desired
source practice makes alteration less necessary and, thus, less appropriate,

Proposition 7.11. The higher the translatability of a desired source practice, the more
that copying—and the less alteration—will become an appropriate translation rule.

However, under such conditions, organizations" acts of knowledge transla-
tions can also be modified by the influence of strong societal values and
norms of demonstrating novelty, newness, and innovations, and therefore,
avoiding copying. As outlined in Chapter 5, such values and norms are
defining features of the Western world's ideals and ideology. Under such soci-
etal conditions—and with a chronic shortage of real novelty and newness
and a corresponding rich supply of well-known practices and templates to
imitate—organizations may try to make changes to known templates to live

up to norms of novelty and newness. The changes translated to the source
practice may be modest and/or radical. In propositional form:


Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 237

Proposition 7.12. The stronger the influence of the societal norms and values of nov-
elty, newness, Inventions, and innovations, the more likely it is that organizations in

such a context will avoid copying a desired source practice and will instead prefer
modification and/or alteration as appropriate translation rules.

Similarity and radical translation

Like the reproducing mode, the degree of similarity between the source
and recipient organizational context may also define the scope conditions
of a radical translation mode. Some of these conditions can be defined in
relation to the three key variables for characterizing the degree of similar-
ity/dissimilarity introduced above: corporate culture, national culture, and
regulatory conditions (institutional distance). Source and recipient contexts
can differ on some variables (for example, in relation to corporate culture)
while being more similar on the others. However, there can also be instances
where the contexts co-varies in such a way that they are clearly different on all
three variables: different corporate cultures, different national cultures, and
different national regulatory conditions. Under such conditions, it is likely
that the desired practice contains various source context-specific elements
that differ severely from and do not fit in with the recipient context. ‘Thus,
it can be risky for translators to try to copy, and even to modify, the desired
practice—and, correspondingly, it can be wise to act relatively unbounded
by such a practice, conceive of it as a source of inspiration, and be willing to
radically transform it and make a domesticated version.

Proposition 7.13. The more dissimilar the source and the recipient contexts (in terms
of corporate culture, national culture, and national regulatory conditions), the more
likely it is that the source practice contains context-specific elements that do not
fit with the recipient context, and the more appropriate alteration will be as a

translation rule.

A translation process may involve shifts in translation rules, which means
usage of different rules in different phases of the process. Such shifts often
reflect processes of learning and adaptation related to efforts to make a trans-
ferred practice work in the recipient organization. A typical trajectory in
such cases starts with attempts to copy a desired source practice and then
sequences into a more radical translation. An example is attempts in the late
1960s to transfer the U.S.-based performance and appraisal system (PAC) to
Norwegian organizations. Most of the early adopters among Norwegian orga-
nizations tried to copy the U.S.-based practices, including tight top-down
surveillance of the individual employees and with individualized payment


|
|
Å
E
i
*
i

238 ATranslation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

«mance and results. By the early 1970s, many emp
Oy.

ers and employees had experienced that replicas of the US.-base dp,

practice did not work in the Norwegian working-life context, Acknowjeg C
ing the severe dissimilarities between American and Norwegian working ‘3
with reference to national cultures as well as regulatory conditions the PA e
practice was radically transformed and adapted to fit the Norwegian iin

systems based on perfo

In propositional form:

Proposition 7.14. Under conditions where a copied and/or slightly adapted Practice
from a dissimilar source context does not work in the recipient organization accord.
ing to local needs and expectation, the appropriateness of alteration as a translation

rule increases.

Scope conditions: The modifying mode

As outlined in Chapter 5, the modifying translation mode reflects acknow]
edgments of the value of balancing concerns for replication (that is, to dvoid

the essentials of the source practice being lost in translation), with concern
for adaptation (meaning to translate a version of the source Practice that ;

sufficiently adapted to and therefore works in the recipient organization)
Although not a knowledge transfer ideal like the reproducing and the rad.
ical modes, and also less researched than those two mentioned, there å
reasons to believe that, in practice, knowledge transfer processes often oto.
ceed as modifying processes with translators aiming to balance concerns for
replication and adaptation. Like the reproducing and radical modes ns
important scope conditions of the modifying mode can be defined in relat
to the two key variables of translatability and similarity. i

Translatability and modifying

Desired source practices to be translated and transferred sometimes co

sist of interconnected elements with different levels of translatability Fo
example, a desired source practice may include technological com ri
(machinery, tools, equipment, etc.) that translators relatively easily can make
representations of and copy. However, the practice may be carried out bya
number of involved actors who use the technology and who cooperate and

styr on more or less tacit and implicit knowledge (as illustrated in Chapter 4
ut the practicing of the handgot method of coal-getting in U.K. coal-mining


Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 239

attempts to modify the less translatable elements. An appropriate transla-
tion rule can be explication, a version of addition, meaning that translators

may try to make the implicit and tacit elements verbalized and explicit in the
recipient version. In propositional form:

practice contains some nonexplicit (tacit) elements that are important for the way it

works, it is appropriate to use explication as translation rule to balance concerns for
replication and adaptation.

However, to make explicit what is implicit in a source practice may be a
challenging translation rule, which involves identifying tacit and assumed
knowledge behind a desired practice and then verbalizing and expressing it

in ways that make sense and make it work in the recipient context (Nonaka
and Takeuchi, 1995; Collins, 2010).

To define scope conditions also means indicating the conditions under
which a certain construct does not apply. While it is generally difficult to
define the limitations of a modifying mode, it is especially challenging to
specify the borderline between conditions that facilitate a modifying mode
versus conditions that facilitate a reproducing mode (Szulanski and Winter,
2002; Baden-Fuller and Winther, 2005).

What characterizes knowledge transfer situations where modifying and
adaption should be avoided in favor of copying? To some extent, the trans-
latability of a desired source practice can guide decisions to choose between
these two rules. As outlined in proposition 7.2, high translatability of a
desired source practice, expressed in a clear and stable template—and with
good access for recipient actors to achieve additional information about the
practice—increases the appropriateness of copying as translation rule. How-
ever, a clear and stable template of a desired practice can also be modified, due
to attempts to balance concerns for replication with concerns for sufficiently
adaptations to make it work in the recipient context.

Limited or low translatability is also a challenging condition that has
implications for choosing between copying and modification. Instances char-
acterized by a good working desired practice of limited translatability can be
tempting for translators to apply copying as a translation rule. For example,
this could be cases where there is a source practice that leads to desired
results, but where the translators lack insights into the inherent cause-effect

mechanisms. The main argument for copying in such cases is that if a prac-
tice works, but the translators do not know why, they should be especially

340 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfe

«autious and avoid changing anything that = en Critical com.
ponents and the relationships among them arne var oh. ed SOUrce
practice effective (Calsyn, et al., 1977; Blakely ‘ | he 3 ad " TOWEVer, the
inherent dilemma here is that if the translator lacks knowledge into the Cause

effect —relationships of a desired source practice, and especially where there

are restrictions on gaining such knowledge—translator 4 will also lack a Clear
template to copy, and run the risk of accidentally making changes to jt that

may also change the way it works. In such cases, it re be wiser _ modify and
domesticate to increase the chances that it will work in the recipient context

An important factor to guide choices about whether to copy or modify

te whether or not it is evidenced that replicas of an actual source Practice
have led to desired results in other organizations. The more such evidence is

available, the more the appropriateness of copying increases, and the more
-autious should translators be to avoid introducing modifications.

The various concerns discussed above (translatability, access to additiona]
information, and evidenced effects) are seen in comparison and indicate
important borderlines between a reproducing mode and a modifying trans-

lation mode. In propositional form:

Proposition 7.16. The higher the translatability of a desired source practice, the bet-
ter the recipient-based translators’ access to additional information about it, and
the more the practice's desired effects are evidenced from other organizations, the
less appropriate a modifying mode will be and, conversely, the more appropriate a
reproducing mode will be as a translation rule.

Similarity and a modifying mode

The degree of similarity/dissimilarity between the source and recipient orga-
nizational contexts may help define some scope conditions of the modifying
mode. While a high degree of dissimilarity facilitates a radical mode, and a
high degree of context similarity facilitates a reproducing mode, it is pro-
posed that the appropriateness of a modifying mode probably increases
under conditions of medium similarity/ dissimilarity. The concept of medium
similarity/dissimilarity can be clarified in relation to national cultural dis-
tance and institutional distance (regulatory conditions), Hofstede (1980) and
Hofstede, Hofstede and Minkov (2010) described and analyzed types and
degree of cultural similarities between nations. For example, Sweden and
Denmark are rather similar when compared on the dimensions of power
distance, individualism/collectivism, masculinity, uncertainty avoidance, long-
term orientation, and indulgence/restraint. According to the same dimen-
sions, these two nations differ greatly from many other nations, such as


Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 241

Brazil, China, and Japan. However, according to Hofstede's (1980) research,
Sweden and Denmark are relatively (medium) similar/dissimilar compared
to some other nations, including Finland, the United States, and Canada.
Nations also vary according to regulatory conditions, which refer to a coun-
try's laws, formal rules and regulations (Kostova, 1999; Kostova et al., 2020).
For example, while the Nordic countries are rather similar on many vari-
ables in terms of public administrative regulatory conditions (Kuhlmann and
Wollmann, 2019), some studies show that the Nordic countries are quite
dissimilar to some Mediterranean countries (Greve et al., 2020). However,
research also indicates that European states that are members of the European
Union (E.U.)—although different on a number of variables—have developed
increasingly similar public administrative structures, laws, regulations, and
practices as effects of the European integration process (Knill et al., 2001;
Olsen, 2002; Kuhlmann and Wollman, 2019), to such an extent that they
appear as moderately similar/dissimilar.

Under such conditions of medium similarity/dissimilarity between the
source and the recipient organizational contexts, translators may be reluc-

tant to apply copying as a translation rule, due to the differences between the
contexts, and also reluctant to radically transform the desired source practice,

due to acknowledging the relative similarity between the contexts and there-
fore, a fair chance of being able to recreate the source practice desired effects
in the recipient organization. A situation characterized by medium similar-
ity/dissimilarity between the source and the recipient contexts is likely to bea
condition that facilitates use of a modifying translation rule where translators
try to balance concerns about not losing the essentials of the desired practice
with concerns about making the practice work in the recipient context.

One such balancing act can be to apply the modifying translation rule of
“omission,” which refers to the toning down and/or the subtraction of an ele-
ment present in the source version in the translated recipient version. An
example (highlighted in Chapter 5) was the attempts to recreate the suc-
cess of the Silicon Valley science park in California—in Stockholm, Sweden.
The source and the recipient contexts were relatively similar on a number of
variables, and different on others. For example, the pleasant weather con-
ditions in California were not the same in Stockholm, so this aspect was
toned down in the Stockholm narrative of the Silicon Valley success (Sahlin-
Andersson, 1996). Conditions of medium similarity/dissimilarity between
source and recipient contexts may also facilitate the use of the modify-
ing mode and the translation rule of addition. For example, translators can
carefully try to familiarize a desired source practice by adding elements
from existing good-functioning practices in the recipient organization—as


1

342 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

Møller Mortensen (2020) in her study of the case of
o-production in the Danish municipality of

ditions of medium similarity, translators may

Aalboy,
COmbin,

illustrated by
ring and translating ¢

In practice, under con Då
the rules of omission and addition.

717. Under conditions of medium similarity/dissimilarity betwee,

the appropriateness increases for applying a modi
omission and addition as translation rules
to

Proposition
source and recipient contexts,

ing translation mode, and inter alia, |
balance concerns for replication and adaptation.

Translation competence: Key concepts and argument,

A central suggestion in this book is that translation theory has the Poten.

tial to guide translators deliberate actions in knowledge transfer Processes

This chapter has focused on how insights derived from the translation the.

ory can be useful for practitioners. The point of departure in this chapter jg

the concept of translation performance, which refers to how actors involved

in knowledge transfers gain and use knowledge about source context, the

desired source practice and the recipient context—and how they Choose.

use, and eventually combine and shift various translation rules throughout
the knowledge transfer process. A main argument is that actors transla.

tion performance may explain outcomes of knowledge transfers. Therefore
studies of translators’ performances can be a route to reveal reasons for vari-
ations in transfer outcomes that have not previously been fully understood
and explained. The chapter argues that variations in translators perfor-
mances reflect their translation competence. This concept refers to the sum
of knowledge and skills that an involved actor mobilizes and applies in acts
of transferring knowledge across organizational borders. ‘The two pillars
of translation competence are translators’ knowledge of source and target
contexts—and their knowledge about translation rules and about how to
select the appropriate rules under various conditions.

Modelling knowledge of contexts

Translators’ knowledge of contexts encompasses their knowledge about the
source and target contexts and about the desired source practice to be
transferred. This chapter has proposed connections between the quality of
translators’ knowledge of contexts and outcomes of knowledge transfer pro-
cesses, in terms of the degree to which the translated version accounts for the
essentials of the desired source practice and is appropriately adjusted to and


Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 243

knowledge Aer of —p Degreeof ——p! Level of R [ knowledge
texts VISCOSi il | | |

Figure 7.1 Links between translators' knowledge of contexts and outcomes of
knowledge transfers

works in the recipient context. However, translators’ knowledge of contexts
does not necessarily lead to a desired transfer outcome. This chapter pro-
poses that it depends, among other things, on the scores of three sequenced
intermediate variables. As indicated in Figure 7.1, this sequence of variables
is degree of viscosity, degree of bilingualism, and level of velocity.

A central feature of the quality of translators’ knowledge of contexts is the
viscosity of the knowledge (1), which refers to the degree of thickness, or
thoroughness of translators’ knowledge about the source context, the desired
source practice, and the recipient context. The degree of viscosity of transla-
tors’ knowledge depends (a) on features of the translator’s localization (for
example, inside or outside the source/target organizations), length of expe-
rience, etc.; and (b) on three features of the practice to be transferred and
existing practices in the recipient organization, which is their explicitness,
complexity, and embeddedness. The less explicit, more complex and more
embedded, the harder it is for translators to gain high viscous knowledge,
and vice versa. The degree of viscosity of translators’ knowledge of contexts
sets out important premises for the outcome of transfer processes.

The second intermediate variable is degree of bilingualism (2); that is, the
degree to which individual translators combine high viscous knowledge about
source and target contexts. The degree of bilingualism varies between high
(individual translators combining high viscous knowledge of both source
and recipient context), and low (absence of viscous knowledge of both
source and recipient context among involved translators). Most common in
knowledge transfers is versions of medium bilingualism. Bilingualism is a
premise for the third intermediate variable: level of velocity (3), that is, the
speed at which the translator can alternate between her/his mental maps
containing representations of source context, source desired practice, and
recipient context. Bilingual translators high-velocity iterative moves are an
important premise for arriving at high-quality translations. To some extent,
albeit not fully, the lack of individual bilingual translators in knowledge
transfers can be compensated by establishing pseudo-bilingual translation

= — ——— EEE EE EE


244 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Transfer

By comparison, the above arguments highlight the logic upon which
proposition 7.1 is formulated: “The more the translator possesses and com.
bines high-viscosity knowledge about the source contexts, the desired source
practice, and the recipient context, the more likely it is that the translated
version will account for the essentials of the desired source practice and be
appropriately adjusted to—and work the recipient context.’ However, for
certain other scores on the intermediate variables, outcomes of knowledge
transfer processes can be less desirable. For example, translators may lack vis-
cous knowledge about one or both contexts. Further, in cases where viscous
knowledge is present among translators, conditions for optimal outcomes
can still be missing due to a lack of bilingual translators—which reduces the

chances of high levels of velocity in translation processes.

Deliberate usage of translation rules
The second pillar of translation competence is premised on insights about
translation rules. There are translations rules, which are used in all acts of
knowledge transfer across organizational borders and are decisive for out-
comes of transfer processes. Translation rules are sometimes deliberately
chosen and sometimes taken for granted and just followed. It is argued that
a key component in translation competence is consciousness and knowledge
about how to make more deliberate choices of translation rules. Therefore,
this chapter has concentrated on specifying some important scope conditions
for usage of the various rules. The first is features of the source context and the
desired source practice. The key variable is translatability; that is, the extent
to which the desired source practice can be translated to a representation
without losing the essential elements that account for how it works in the
source context. The second is features of the relationship between recipient
and source organization. The key variable is similarity, which is the degree to
which source and recipient differ/resemble each other on variables such as
nationality and cultural, institutional, and geographical distance/proximity.
The chapter has then argued and developed a set of 17 specific proposals
(see Table 7.1) about which translation rules are appropriate/inappropriate
under certain degrees of translatability of source context/source desired
practice—and degrees of similarity between source and recipient contexts.
The attempts to specify the range of application of the various translation
rules have certain limitations. The efforts are put forward in terms of a set
of proposals, which are not empirically evidenced facts. However, while the
proposals represent the ceiling in this chapter, it should obviously be the floor
for other researchers who set out to test and refine them.


panuiuo)

A te en i, 006 re door ddeitbduagsmå pia. a eS SOS å bd ard OSE Gaard 48 C0 SSS SSS OS

Sk on dre 4 DB dd 2 Mr DD dd Bd dd dåd & død oe SS

'3[14 UOYVISUVA V SV ag JIM
apou 3uonposdaa v a1v11doxddv
240 341 Å12542AU02 “PUY aq [JIM

apowi 8uiKfipom v azvo1sdoiddv

S$3] 241 '$UO1JVZ1UVB340 13410 WOLL

paou2p142 340 $152fJa pasisap
$2211904d Yj 240 341 Pub 1
JNOQDV UO1JOULLOf{ul jpuonippv og
SSIIID SAOJVISUVA Pasvg-juaidiIad
249 42112G ay} ‘a91j9vAd 2241OS
pasisap v fo A11p1qvjvjsuva yj
124814 ay], '91'/ uonisodorg
"uonuvidvpv puv

uoiqvIydad 10f SULBIUOD 2IUVIVG
Og 2(111 UOVISUDAY SV U014VI
-11dxa asn 01 3jv11dosddv 210m
$1 11 SY4OM 11 ADM 241 4Of Juv]
-10 di 240 JOY} sua1U3j2 (11201)
J1INdXxaU0u IULOS SUTVIUOI 2911
-IvAd 224nOS padisap DV 212YM
Aqyiqvjojsuvsy uunipaus Jo suon
-1pPU0I J3PUN “SIZ UOIISOdoLd

'Sa[NA UOIHVISUDAJ
21011d01ddv sv uorvaanv 10/puv
uonvIytpom 13f31d pvajsul im
PUD 32:11901d 2324nOS padisap DV Bul
-£d02 p104v jj1m 1x214U02 VD YINS Ul
SUOIJVZIUVBLO JOY] $1 jt Ajay1] ALOU
241 SUOYPAOUUI PUD SUOYUJAU!
SsaUumau %7J2A0U fo san[pa PUD
SULLOU 121205 34 fo 22uanfur

IY] 19284045 IY], TI 'Z uonisodorq

‘aj UOUDISUDA
ajviidoiddy uv 241022g pm
—uonqv12110 ssaj ayy puv—suikdoo
jDYJ asoul ayy ‘291JIvAd 224NOS
pausap v fo A11qvjvjsuva ayy
124814 ayy, 'TI'/ uonisodorg

‘ajnd UOIVISUDIJ

ajviidosddy uv 211022g [Jim uon
-DISUDA] JVIIPVA D ALOUL JY] “(SI

ji pappaquia puv xajduio2 9120]
alOUL 34 $1 JoY}) 291449vAd 224NOS
passap v fo Ajyiqvjojsuv.4 24]
12m01 ay], ‘OZ uonisodorq

'2JNA UOVISUDA D
sv 8uiXdo> 8u1X1ddv fo ssauapvrid
-04ddv ayy asv212u1 Ajyuanbasqns

puv ‘a91j9v4d 24] jnoqv uonqvW
-LOfU1 jouonippv ud 01 SsaIIV
SAOJVISUVAJ UO $UO1JI111521 maf AG
pajvsuaduuod aq uvd 2001d 1s11f ay]
u1 a91j9v4d 324nos pasisap v fo A1
-11QVJVISUVIL MOT ‘FZ UONISOdOLJ
'3j14

uo1wjsuv.y v sv $urXdoo fo ssauapp
-14dosddv 341 25v2441—2211901d
241 Jnoqv UuoYyDW.10fui JDUOIJIppY
01 SS3IIV $A0JV]SUV1} UO SUO1}
-9141534 Maf YJIM UOYVUIGULOD
u1i—a1j9vAd 224nos pasisap v fo 41
-11qv10jsuvA YS '€'% uoyisodorg

‘aJn4 UOIJVISUDAJ
pv sv ag [Jim SurXdoo ajv11dosddv
ssa] ay} '$121dopv jv1juajod puv
SUOYPVZIUVSIO PaJVI0|-3p151NO
4of paj2111524 $1 2011904d ayy
moqv uonqvuw.ofui jouonippv og
$$222V JDY] 240 BY} Puv 2I:1904d
224NOs pasisap v fo K11y1qvjvsuDa
34] 12M0] AY], 7'% uorsodorg

—

UOISSTULQ 28 UONIPPV

uoneJINV

apour FurÅ PO

—_ —

9919 81d JDINOS PdIIsdp/}Xd}UOD 30INOS JO

AyyIqoyvsuvd J
:DJQEUPA Ady

JOUNOS AH.L AO SAUNOLLVAA

sutddo’)

3pou [EIJIPPY

EE — EEE

suonIpuo> sdods

pour 3urnpoiday

Sopni UONEJSUEIJ,

—

—

SUONIPU0D 3dODS SNOMEA JOpUN SaJNI UONEISUEN ayeudoiddy T'z alger


"uouvidvpv puv

UONDIId24 40f SULBIUOI aDUYIDG
07—s52J114 UONVISUDA SV UONIPPD
PUD UOISSIWO VID 1311 puv
‘Qpoul UOVISUDAY suldfipou v
Su1X1ddv 40{ sasvaa2u1 ssauajoi1ad
-04ddv 341 $1x21u03 1u21d1224 pub
224NOS UzaMmjaq ÅJIADIIULISSIP/ÅJI
AD] IMIS WUNIPIUL JO SUONIPUOI
J2pun ”Z1T'Z uonisodoug

'S25V24JIUI
o[Nå UOHVISUDA V SV UONBLL3yv fo
ssauajwiidoiddy 3141 uorvj2adx3
puv spaau 1020] 0} 8urp40220 uon
-V21UV340 JUIId1234 34 U1 Y4om
JOU SJ0P 1X21U02 224NOS AVIIUUISSTP
v WO4f 221104d pardvpv 41481
40/puv pardod v asaym suonyip
-U0) J19PUN PI'/ UOINISOdoLq

'2JN4 UOIVISUVAL VD SV aq
im UONDAI10 31014do1ddv asout
34] PUD 4xajuod juaidizas ayy YIM
11f Jou op wy sjuauaja I1f12ads
-JX3JUOI SUIVIUOI 3I:14IVA4d 324NOS
241 JDJ $1 11 £2%1] 240 ayy (suoiy
-1PUOI £10j011N324 JOUOIJVU puv
23417112 jouorvu 24nIJN> 327010d
-409 fo Sutsa] U1) $X21U0J JUI1d1224
IY] PUY JIANOS IYJ AVIIULISSIP

24044 IUJ, '€1'/ Uonisodorq

‘a]NA UONDVISUDAJ V Sv ag
jjim Surddoo a1011dosddv ssap ayy
puv—juatdizas ayy yy ut jf jou
Op JOY} Sjuauaja PasvIg-21NINI
[VUO1JBU SUIDVIUOI 3I1J9P4d BIANOS
padisap 34 JOY] $1 41 Ajayt] 240m
24] 'SUonqvz1UV31O0 JualdiIa4 puv
a24nos fo sa4nyndI jouonvu 34 491
-ULISSIP 340UL AY], *Z°Z UONISEOdoLd

‘ajnd UOIVISUD
v sv aq jj1m 8u1ddoo ajv11dosddv
2A0UL 34] PUD SUOYVZIUDSIO
juaidizas ayy yum 11f fr 321320 1d
224NOS padisap JUG Ut JuasayUl
sjuauaja I1f19ads-jvanyjno Auv wy]
$1 31 AJay1] AAOUL 241 240 Sa4nqjnI
21040d102 1ua1d1224 puv a2inos
AVIIUAIS ALOUL BYT, '9'% UONISOdOLd

‘ayn
UOYVISUDAJ V SV aq [JIM Suikdo»
21014d01ddv ssa] 341 puv 'suonvz
-1UV340 JUard1224 ayy ul 11 jou
ffi.m 2914904d 224nNOS padisap ay} Ul
juasayul SJUIULDIJJI Iifidads-jvanyjn3
Auv 1011 421] 240 3141 ‘sainyjng
21040402 1ua1d1224 puv 324nOs 407!
-WAISS1P 240UL YT, 'G'% UOnISOdorg

Ap avpus
:ajqetiea Ady

HOUNOS ANV LNYIdIDYAT NAAM.LAd

NOLLV TAA 4HL AO SAUN.LVSA

spow SurAjIpow

pour [eorpey

>pou gurnpoiday

Sopni UONPJSUEIJ,

panunuoy 2 AIQeL


'9J/N14 UOIVISUD.IJ
v sv ag jj1.m 8u1£doo ajv011dosddv
ssa] 24] PUD—A1UNOJ JUILd1224
IY} Ul SUOYIPUOJ JA1JVINBAL BY]
Yyjim 11f JOU tim 2214904d 224NOS
pasisap 341 fo 3uruoounf ayy
4of suorwn324 2uf122ds-Kaqunoo
fo sa12:12puadap Auv joy} st 11
Ajay] 2401 34] UOYPZI1UPS10
1421d1224 ay} puv uoyvziuvåio
224nos ay} fo Ka4yunod 3504 ay} fo
UO1PUO AL0JVINGaL JY] AV]IUAIS
-SIp 240 BY], '6'% UOIpISOdoLg
‘and Uoljw{sUuDY

D sv aq [jim BuiXdoa ayv1adoiddv
a4OUL 34] Pub—JUuaId19a4 341 YUM
ut 11f Ayjonquaaa jim 2013904d
2241NOS pasisap ay} Ul Juasayul
sjuausaja pasvig-aanjjnd joUONDU
1041 St 31 Ajayt] 2401 ayy ‘SUuoI
-VZ1UVS340 JUIId19a4 puv 2324nos
Jo saanyn> jpouonvu 34 4071
-WIS ALOU BY], '8'% UOIJISOdOLg


sfer
248 A Translation Theory of Knowledge Tran

The relationship between knowledge of contexts and deliberate Usage

of translation rules
This chapter has identified and the

tion competence: knowledge of con

orized two intertwined pillars of tran ilo.
texts and knowledge and deliberate Usage

of translation rules. High viscous knowledge of pe texts among ved

's important for outcomes of knowledge transfer processes, OWever,
actors is impo knowledge of contexts is a necessary element of translatio,,
as a sp safficent because it does not necessarily lead to deliber.
maint aa rules. Actors involved in knowledge transfers should

avoid habitual (non)choices of translation rules and ome erm of and
knowledgeable about the repertoire of translation rules pp a “ Based on
knowledge of contexts, scope conditions pertinent to eac trans er Process
should be scrutinized and the insights gained should premise deliberate
choices of translation rules. _

Knowledge transfer processes frequently call upon translators’ skills to
combine various translation rules and/or to shift rules throughout the trans.
fer process. Regarding the need for combination of rules: When scrutinizing
a desired source practice, involved translators may conclude that some ele-
ments represent the core cause-effect mechanism of the practice and should
therefore be copied, while other elements require modifications and some.
times perhaps radical transformations as adaptions to the target context, An
example is provided in Mortensen’s (2020) study of the transfer of the practice
of co-production to the municipality of Aalborg, Denmark (cf. Chapter 6),
She showed that while what was conceived of as the core of the practice was
largely copied (involving the service receivers in the production of the ser-
vice), other elements were subtracted or toned down and some new elements
were added.

It can also be appropriate and necessary to shift from some translation rules
to some other ones due to characteristics of how certain transfer processes
proceed. Knowledge transfer processes often resemble processes of experi-
ential learning, where translators gradually learn about the desired source
practice, as well as about how the translated version works in the recipient
context. Such learning processes may come to expression in some typical tra-
jectories of changes in translation rules throughout the transfer, One example
is trajectories where translators initially modify a desired source practice
and, after a while, change to copying. In such cases, a modifying mode may
have been chosen deliberately, but it may also be “accidental modifications”
because the translators initially lacked thorough knowledge of the desired
source practice that they wanted to recreate, For example, such processes are
common in knowledge transfers of training methods and technologies within


Translation Competence: Implications for Knowledge Transfer 249

various sports (Erhardt et al., 2014). Depending on the availability of addi-
tional knowledge about the desired source practice, athletes may gradually
learn more about the template and, after a while, be able to reproduce fully.
Another typical translation trajectory runs in reverse order; that is, from an
initial usage of copying and to modifications, and sometimes ending as a rad-
ical translation. Such a trajectory may reflect experiential learning, where an
initial copying strategy turns out not to work in the recipient context, and is
therefore followed by shifts in translation rules to modifying and/or to alter-
ation. ‘The capacity of translators to sense changes in scope conditions and
to shift to more appropriate rules accordingly can be decisive for outcomes.
An example of the lack of such capacity is provided in the analysis of the
enduring attempts over three decades to replicate Ford fabric and Tayloristic
organizing principles from the United States in British coal mines. Although
this led to numerous negative effects (such as decreased quality of working
environment, stoppages, and lowered efficiency), the reproducing mode was
maintained long after it should have been changed to a modifying mode.


References

Abdrashitova, L., Sadykova, G., and Anthony, N. (2018) Explicitation in translation studies.
Defining theoretical framework, National Academy of Managerial Staff of Culture and Arts

Herald. https://doi.org/ 10.32461/2226-3209.3.2018.171173 | ik
Abrahamsen, H. and Aas, M. (2016) School leadership for the future: Heroic or distributed?

Translating international discourses in Norwegian policy documents, Journal of Educational

Administration and History, 48(1): 68-88. |
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Querubin, P, and Robinson, J.A. (2008) When does policy reform

work? The case of central bank independence, Working Paper 14033, National Bureau of

Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Adler, P. (1999) Hybridization, human resource management at two Toyota plants, in J.K,

Liker, M.W, Fruin, and P. Adler (eds.), Remade in America, T ransplanting and Transforming
Japanese Management Systems, New York: Oxford University Press: 75-116.
Adler, P.S. (2001) Market, hierarchy, and trust: The knowledge economy and the future of

capitalism, Organization Science, 12(2): 215-34.
Adler, PS. and Kwon, S.W. (2002) Social capital: Prospects for a new concept, Academy of

Management Review, 27(1): 17-40.
Agarwal, R., Echambadi, R., Franco, A.M. and Sarkar, M.B. (2004) Knowledge transfer

through inheritance: Spin-out generation, development, and survival, Academy of Manage-

ment Journal, 47(4): 501-22.
Aghion, P., Howitt, P., Brant-Collett, M., and Garcfa-Pefialosa, C. (1998) Endogenous Growth

Theory, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Aguilera, R. V., and Grogaard, B. (2019) The dubious role of institutions in international
business: A road forward, Journal of International Business Studies, 50(1): 20-35.

Ahmad, A., Bosua, R., and Scheepers, R. (2014) Protecting organizational competitive advan-
tage: A knowledge leakage perspective, Computers & Security, 42: 27-39,

Ahuja, G. (2000) Collaboration networks, structural holes, and innovation: A longitudinal
study, Administrative Science Quarterly, 45(3): 425-55,

Alavi, M. and Leidner, D. (1999) Knowledge management systems: Issues, challenges, and
benefits, Communications of the Association for Information systems, 1(1): 1-28.

Alavi, M., and Leidner, D.E. (2001) Knowledge management and knowledge management
systems: Conceptual foundations and research issues, MIS Quarterly, 25 (1): 107-36.

Albert, S. and Whetten, D.A. (1985) Organizational identity, in L.L. Cummings and M. Staw
(eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior, Greenwich, CT: JAI: 263-95.

Albir, A.H. and Alves, F. (2009) Translation as a cognitive activity, in J. Munday (ed.), The
Routledge Companion to Translation Studies, London: Routledge: 54-73.

Alchian, A.A. (1950) Uncertainty, evolution, and economic theory, Journal of Political Econ-
omy, 58(3): 211-21.

Alchian, A.A. and Demsetz, H. (1972) Production, information costs, and economic organi-
zation, The American Economic Review, 62(5): 777-95.

Aldrich, H. (1999) Organizations Evolving, Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.

Alexander, A.T. and Childe, S.J. (2013) Innovation: A knowledge transfer perspective, Produc-
tion Planning & Control, 24(2-3): 208-25.


References 251

Alves, F. and Albir, A.H. (2017) Evolution, challenges, and perspectives for research on cog-
nitive aspects of translation, in LW. Schwieter and A. Ferreira (eds.), The Handbook of
Translation and Cognition, West Sussex: Wiley Blackwell: 537-54,

Alvesson, M. (1993) The play of metaphors, in J, Hassard. and M. Parker (eds.), Postmodernism
and Organizations, London: Sage: 114-131.

Alvesson, M. (2012) Understanding Organizational Culture, London: Sage.

Alvesson, M. and Spicer, A. (2011) Introduction, in M. Alvesson and A. Spicer (eds.),
Metaphors We Lead By, London and New York: Routledge: 1-7,

Amara, N.,, Landry, R,, and Traoré, N. (2008) Managing the protection of innovations in
knowledge-intensive business services, Research Policy, 37(9): 1530-47.

Ambos, TC. and Ambos, B. (2009) The impact of distance on knowledge transfer effectiveness
in multinational corporations, Journal of International Management, 48: 24-41.

Ambrosini, V. and Bowman, C. (2005) Reducing causal ambiguity to facilitate strategic
learning, Management Learning, 36(4): 493-512.

Amin, A. and Cohendet, P. (2004) Architectures of Knowledge: Firms, Capabilities, and Com-
munities, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Ancona, D.G. and Caldwell, D.F. (1992) Bridging the boundary: External activity and perfor-
mance in organizational teams, Administrative Science Quarterly, 3(3): 634-65.

Anderman, G. and Rogers, M. (2000) Translator training between academia and profes-
sion: Å European perspective, in C. Schåffner and B. Adab (eds.), Developing Translation
Competence, Amsterdam/ Philadelphia: John Benjamins: 63-73.

Andersen, H. and Røvik, K.A. (2015) Lost in translation: A case-study of the travel of lean
thinking in a hospital, BMC Health Services Research, 15(1): 1-9.

Andersen, H., Røvik, K.A., and Ingebrigtsen, T. (2014) Lean thinking in hospitals: Is there a
cure for the absence of evidence? A systematic review of reviews, BMJ Open, 4(1). https://
doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003873

Anderson, R. and Kroc, R. (2018) Grinding It Out: The Making of McDonald’, Old Saybrook,
Connecticut: Tantor Media.

Andriessen, D. and Gubbins, C. (2009) Metaphor analysis as an approach for exploring
theoretical concepts: The case of social capital, Organization Studies, 30(8): 845-63.

Ansari, S.M., Fiss, P.C., and Zajac, E.J. (2010) Made to fit: How practices vary as they diffuse,

Academy of Management Review, 35(1): 67-92.
Antal, A.B. (2000) Types of knowledge gained by expatriate managers, Journal of General

Management, 26(2): 32-51.
Antal, A.B. (2001) Expatriates’ contributions to organizational learning, Journal of General

Management, 26(4): 62-84.
Apriliyanti, I. D., and Alon, I. (2017) Bibliometric analysis of absorptive capacity, International

Business Review, 26(5): 896-907,
Apt, K.R., Blair, H.A., and Walker, A. (1988) Towards a theory of declarative knowledge,
in J. Minker (ed.), Foundations of Deductive Databases and Logic Programming, Morgan

Kaufmann: 89-148.
Ardichvili, A. and Cardozo, R.N. (2000) A model of the entrepreneurial opportunity recogni-

tion process, Journal of Enterprising Culture, 8(2): 103-19.

Argote, L. (1993) Group and organizational learning curves: Individual, system and environ-
mental components, British Journal of Social Psychology, 32(1): 31-51.

Argote, L. (1999) Organizational learning: Creating, Retaining and Transferring Knowledge,
Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Argote, L. (2015) Knowledge transfer and organizational learning, in K. Kraiger, J. Pass-
more, N.R. dos Santos, and $. Malvezzi, The Wiley Blackwell Handbook of the Psychology

of Training, Development, and Performance Improvement, New York: Wiley: 154-70.


252 References

Argote, L. and Ingram, P (2000) Knowledge transfer: A basis for competitive advantage in
rgote, L. am, P.

| ision Processes, 82(1): 150-69.
‘ational Behavior and Human Dec |
ng eg Levine, J.M., and Moreland, R.L. (2000) Knowledge transfer in Orga-
ar Terai rom the ex hers, Organizational Behavior and Human
nizations: L

Decision Processes, 82(1): 1-8.
Argyris, C. (1976) Single-loop and dou

ye Sci , 363-75.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 21(3): 363 | | |
Armbriister, T. (2006) The Economics and Sociology of Management Consulting, Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.
kall Koni mn A, (2001) Does proximity matter for knowledge transfer from public
institutes and universities to firms? SPRU-Science Policy Research Unit, University of Sussex

| | | 73.
Business School, SPRU Electronic Working Paper Series, no.
Ash, M.K. (2008) The Mary Kay way: Timeless Principles from Americas Greatest Woman

w York: John Wiley & Sons.

peng Jena Ta ae AL, and Lægreid, P. (2008) Reor ganizing the Norwegian
Welfare Administration, The Stein Rokkan Centre for Social Studies, Working Paper No. 10,

Averbuch, I. (2007) Body-to-body transmission: the copying tradition of Kagura, in R. Cox
(ed.), The Culture of Copying in Japan, New York: Routledge: 33-51. |

Ax, C., and Bjornenak, T. (2005) Bundling and diffusion of management accounting inno-
vations: the case of the balanced scorecard in Sweden, Management Accounting Research:
1601): 1-20.

Ax, C. and T. Bjørnenak (2007) Management accounting innovations: origins and diffusion,
in Hopper, T., Northcott, D and Scapens, R.W (Eds.), Issues in Management Accounting, 3.
edition, 357-376, Hertfordshire: Prentice-Hall.

Axelsson, B. and Johanson, J. (1992) Foreign market entry—the textbook vs. the network view.
In B. Axelsson and G. Easton (eds.), Industrial Networks: A New View of Reality, London:
Routledge: 218-34.

Babson, S. (1998) Mazda and Ford at flat rock: Transfer and hybridization of the Japanese
model, in E. Boyer, E. Charron, U. Jurgens, and S. Tolliday (eds.), Between Imitation
and Innovation: the Transfer and Hybridization of Productive Models in the International
Automobile Industry, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 161-88.

Bacharach, S.B. (1989) Organizational theories: Some criteria for evaluation, Academy of
Management Review, 14(4): 496-515.

Bacon, E., Williams, M.D., and Davies, G.H. (2019) Recipes for success: Conditions for
knowledge transfer across open innovation ecosystems, International Journal of Information
Management, 49: 377-87.

Baden-Fuller, C. and Morgan, M.S, (2010) Business models as models, Long Range Planning,
43(2-3): 156-71.

Baden-Fuller, C. and Winter, S.G. (2005) Replicating organizational knowledge: principles or
templates? Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1118013 or http://dx.doi.org/10.
2139/ssrn.1118013

Baer, B. J. (2020) From cultural translation to untranslatability, Alif: Journal of Comparative
Poetics, (40): 139-163.

Bailey, C. (2016) Employee engagement: do practitioners care what academics have to say-And
should they? Human Resource Management Review. doi:10.1016/j.hrmr.2016.12.014

Bailey, K.D. (1994) Typologies and Taxonomies: An Introduction to Classification Techniques,
Thousand Oaks: Sage.

Baker, M. (1992) In other words: A Coursebook On Translation, London, New York: Routledge.

Baker, M. (1998) Introduction, in M. Baker (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation Studies,
London: Routledge, 1-6.

perience of ot

ble-loop models in research on decision making,


References 253

Barkhudarov, L-A. (1975) Yasik I Perevod (Language and Translation), Moscow: Mezhdunar-
odye Otnoshenyiya.

Barnes, J.A. (1954) Class and committees in a Norwegian island parish, Human Relations, 7(1):
39-58.

Barney, J. (1991) Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage, Journal of Management,
17(1): 99-120.

Barros, M. and Riiling, C. C. (2019) Business media, in A. Sturdy, S, Heusinkveld, T. Reay, and
D, Strang (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Management Ideas, Oxford: Oxford University
Press: 195-215,

Barth, F. (1963) The Role of the Entrepreneur in Social Change in Northern Norway, Oslo: The
University Press.

Bartunek, J.M. and Rynes, S.L. (2010) The construction and contributions of implications for
practice: What's in them and what might they offer? The Academy of Management Learning
and Education, 9(1): 100-17.

Bartunek, J.M. and Rynes, S. L. (2014) Academics and practitioners are alike and unlike: The
paradoxes of academic-practitioner relationships, Journal of Management, 40(5): 1181-
201.

Bassnett, S. (2002) Translation Studies, London: Routledge.

Bassnett, S. and Lefevere, A. (1990) Translation, History, and Culture, London: Burns & Oates.

Bassnett, S. and Lefevere, A. (1998) Constructing cultures: Essays on literary translation,
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.

Bastin, G.L. (2008) Adaptation, in M. Baker (ed.), The Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation
Studies, London and New York: Routledge: 3-6.

Bateh, J., Castaneda, M.E., and Farah, J.E. (2013) Employee resistance to organizational change,
International Journal of Management & Information Systems (IJMIS), 17(2): 113-16.

Baughn, C. C., Denekamp, J. G., Stevens, J. H., and Osborn, R. N. (1997) Protecting intellectual
capital in international alliances, Journal of World Business, 32(2), 103-117.

Baum, J. A., Calabrese, T., and Silverman, B. S. (2000) Don't go it alone: Alliance network
composition and startups’ performance in Canadian biotechnology, Strategic Management

Journal, 21(3): 267-94.
Bauman, L.J., Stein, R.E., and Ireys, H.T. (1991) Reinventing fidelity: The transfer of social

technology among settings, American Journal of Community Psychology, 19(4): 619-39.
Bausch, M. (2022) Intercultural Transfer of Management Practices of German MNC to Brazil:
The Interplay of Translation and Recontextualization, Wiesbaden: Springer Nature.
Bausch, M., Barmeyer, C., and Mayrhofer, U. (2022) Facilitating factors in the cross-cultural
transfer of management practices: The case of a German multinational in Brazil. Interna-

tional Business Review, 31(2): 101921.
Becerra, M., Lunnan, R., and Huemer, L. (2008) Trustworthiness, risk, and the transfer of

tacit and explicit knowledge between alliance partner, Journal of Management Studies, 45(4):

691-713.
Becker, M.C. (2004) Organizational routines: a review of the literature, Industrial and Corpo-

rate Change, 13(4): 643-78.
Beer, S. (1981) Brain of the Firm, London: Chichester Wiley.
Beissinger, S.R., Ackerly, D.D., Doremus, H., and Machlis, G.E. (2017) Science, Conservation,

and National Parks, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Bejan, A. and Kraus, A.D. (2003) Heat Transfer Handbook, New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Bendell, T., Boulter, I., and Kelly, J. (1998) Benchmarking for Competitive Advantage, London:

Pitman Publishing. —
Berger, P. and Luckman, T. (1966) The Social Construction of Reality—A Treatise in the

Sociology of Knowledge, Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin.


254 References

workforce reduction—A longitudina|

Bergström, O. (2007) Translatin socially responsible
pr sk f Scandinavian Journal of Management,

study of workforce reduction in a Swedish company,

23(4): 384-405. | |
Berling, T.V., Gad, U.P. Petersen, K.L., and Wæver, O. (2022) Translations of security: A
s, London: Taylor & Francis.

framework for the study of unwanted future EP
Berman, A. (1992) The Experience of the Foreign: Culture and Translation in Romantic

Germany, Albany: SUNY Press.
Berman, S.L., Down, J., and Hill, C.W. (2002)

advantage in the National Basketball Association,
13-31.

Berta, W.B. and Baker, R. (2004)
for reducing error in hospitals,

Beugelsdijk, S., Ambos, B., and Phillip C.N.
in international business research: Recurring ques

of International Business Studies, 49(9): 1113-37.

Beugelsdijk, S., Kostova, T., Kunst, V.E., Spadafora,
tance and firm internationalization: A meta-ana

Journal of Management, 44(1): 89-130.
Beugelsdijk, S., Kostova, T., and Roth, K. (2017) An overview of Hofstede-inspired country-

level culture research in international business since 2006, Journal of International Business

Studies, 48(1): 30-47.
Bierly III P.E., Damanpour, F., and Santoro, M.D. (2009) The application of external knowledge:

organizational conditions for exploration and exploitation, Journal of Management Studies,
46(3): 481-509.

Bignami, F., Mattsson, P., and Hoekman, J. (2020) The importance of geographical dis-
tance to different types of R&D collaboration in the pharmaceutical industry, Industry and

Innovation, 27(5): 513-37.
Billow, R. M. (1977) Metaphor: A review of the psychological literature. Psychological Bulletin,

84(1) 81-92.
Björkman, I., Barner-Rasmussen, W,, and Li, L. (2004) Managing knowledge transfer in
MNCs: The impact of headquarters control mechanisms, Journal of International Business

Studies, 35(5): 443-55.
Blackman, D. and Benson, A.M. (2012) Overcoming knowledge stickiness in scientific knowl-

edge transfer, Public Understanding of Science, 21(5): 573-89.

Blakely, C.H., Mayer, J.P., Gottschalk, R.G., Schmitt, N., Davidson, W.S., Roitman, D.B., and
Emshoff, J.G. (1987) The fidelity-adaptation debate: Implications for the implementation of
public sector social programs, American Journal of Community Psychology, 15(3): 253-68.

Blalock, H.M. (1969) Theory Construction: From verbal to mathematical formulations, Engle-

wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice- Hall.
Blau, P.M. and Scott, W.R. (1962) Formal Organizations: A Comparative Approach, San

Francisco: Chandler.
Blau, P.M. and Scott, W.R. (1963) Formal organizations: A Comparative Approach. London:

Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Block, F. (2003) Karl Polanyi and the writing of the Great Transformation, Theory and Society,
32(3): 275-306.

Blumer, H. (1969) Fashion: From class differentiation to collective selection, The Sociological
Quarterly, 10(3): 275-91.

Blum-Kulka, S. (1986) Shifts of cohesion and coherence in translation, in J. House and S.
Blum-Kulka (eds.) Interlingual and Intercultural Communication: Discourse and Cognition
in Translation and Second Language Acquisition Studies, 17-36, Tiibingen: Narr.

Tacit knowledge as a source of competitive
Academy of Management Journal, 45(1);

Factors that impact the transfer and retention of best practices

Health Care Management Review, 29(2): 90-7.
(2018) Conceptualizing and measuring distance

tions and best practice guidelines Journal

E,, and Van Essen, M. (2018) Cultural dis-
lytical review and theoretical implications,


References 255

Bodin, Ø. and Crona, B. I. (2009) The role of social networks in natural resource governance:
What relational patterns make a difference? Global Environmental Change, 19(3): 366-74. |

Boh, W.F., Nguyen, T.T. and Xu, Y. (2013) Knowledge transfer across dissimilar cultures.
Journal of Knowledge Management, 17 (1): 29-46.

Borch, O.J. and Korneliussen, I. (1995) Norsk tørrfisknæring: Markedstilpasning og
eksportorganisering ("The Norwegian stockfish industry: Adjustments to markets and
export organizing”), Bodø: NF-rapport, 2: 36-7.

Borges, R., Bernardi, M,, and Petrin, R. (2019) Cross-country findings on tacit knowledge
sharing: evidence from the Brazilian and Indonesian IT workers, Journal of Knowledge
Management, 23(4): 742-62.

Borve, H. E. and Kvande, E. (2022) The translation of Nordic workplace democracy to the
on States, Nordic Journal of Working Life Studies, 12(3). https://doi.org/10.18291/njwls.

Botha, M.E. (1986) Metaphorical models and scientific realism, South African Journal of
Philosophy, 5: 83-7,

Bouncken, R.B. (2015) Ambiguity and knowledge transfer in innovation alliances, Interna-
tional Journal of Entrepreneurial Venturing, 7(4): 309-23.

Bouncken, R.B. and Kraus, S$, (2013) Innovation in knowledge-intensive industries: The
double-edged sword of coopetition, Journal of Business Research, 66(10): 2060-70.

Boutaiba, S. and Strandgaard Pedersen, J. (2003) Creating MBA identity—Between
field and organization, in R.P. Amdam, R. Kvålshaugen, and E. Larsen (eds.),
Inside the Business School: The Contents of European Business Education, Oslo,
Norway/Stockholm/Copenhagen, Denmark: Abstrakt, Lieber, and CBS Press: 197-218.

Bowden, R. (1999) What is wrong with an art forgery? An anthropological perspective, The
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 57(3): 333-43.

Bower, G. H. and Hilgard, E.R. (1981) Theories of Learning, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-

Hall
Boxenbaum, E and Jonsson, S. (2017) Isomorphism, diffusion and decoupling: Concept evo-

lution and theoretical challenges, in R. Greenwood, C. Oliver, T. B. Lawrence, and R. E.
Meyer (eds.), The SAGE Handbook of Organizational Institutionalism (2nd ed.), London:

SAGE Publications: 77-101.
Boxenbaum, E. and Rouleau, L. (2011) New knowledge products as bricolage: Metaphors and

scripts in organizational theory, Academy of Management Review, 36(2): 272-96.
Boxenbaum, E. and Strandgaard Pedersen, J. (2009) Scandinavian institutionalism: A case

of institutional work, in T.B. Lawrence, R. Suddaby, and B. Leca (eds.), Institutional

Work: Actors and Agency in Institutional Studies of Organizations, Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press: 178-204.
Bozié, K., Bachkirov, A. A., and Cerne, M. (2022) Towards better understanding and narrowing

of the science-practice gap: A practitioner-centered approach to management knowledge

creation, European Management Journal, 40(4): 632-44.
Brander, J.A., Cui, V., and Vertinsky, I. (2017) China and intellectual property rights: A

challenge to the rule of law, Journal of International Business Studies, 48(7): 908-21.
Breschi, S. and Malerba, F. (2001) The geography of innovation and economic clustering: some

introductory notes, Industrial and Corporate Change, 10(4): 817-33.
Bresman, H., Birkinshaw, J., and Nobel, R. (1999) Knowledge transfer in international acqui-

sitions, Journal of International Business Studies, 30(3): 439-62.
Bresman, H., Birkinshaw, J., and Nobel, R. (2010) Knowledge transfer in international acqui-

sitions, Journal of International Business Studies, 41(1): 5-20.
Brisset, A. (1989) In Search of a Target Language: The Politics of Theatre Translation in Quebec,

Target—International Journal of Translation Studies, 1(1): 9-27.


256 References

Brix, J., Krogstrup, H.K., and Mortensen, N.M. (2020) Evaluating the outcomes of ca.
production in local government, Local Government Studies, 46(2): 169-85.

Bromley, P. and Meyer, J.W. (2017) “They are all organizations ': The cultural roots of blurring

between the nonprofit, business, and government sectors, Administration & Society, 49(7).

939-66.
Bromley, P. and Powell, W.W. (2012)
in the contemporary world, Academy of Ma
Brown, J.S. and Duguid, P. (1991) Organiza é
Toward a unified view of working, learning; and innovation,

40-57. | |
Brown, J.S. and Duguid, P. (2001) Knowledge and organization: A social-practice perspective,

Organization science, 12(2): 198-213. |
Brunsson, N. (1989) The Organization of Hypocrisy: Talk, Decisions and Actions in Organiza-

tions, New York: John Wiley & Sons. |
Brunsson, N. and Jacobsson, B., (2000) Following standards, in N. Brunsson and B. Jacobsson

(eds.) A world of standards, 125-37, Oxford: Oxford University Press

Brunsson, N. and Sahlin-Andersson, K. (2000) Constructing organizations: The example of
public sector reform, Organization studies, 21(4): 721-46.

Bunge, S.A. (2004) How we use rules to select actions: a review of evidence from cognitive

neuroscience, Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 4(4): 564-79.

Bunnell, T. and Coe, N. (2001) Spaces and Scales of Innovation, Progress in Human Geography,
25(4): 569-89.

Burke, R.J. (1996) Performance evaluation and counselling in a professional services firm,
Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 17: 21-7.

Burmeister, A. (2017) Repatriate knowledge transfer: a systematic review of the literature, in
B. Bader, T. Schuster, and A.K. Bader (eds.), Expatriate Management, London: Palgrave
Macmillan: 225-64.

Burmeister, A. and Deller, J. (2016) A practical perspective on repatriate knowledge transfer,
Journal of Global Mobility: The Home of Expatriate Management Research, 4: 68-87.

Burns T. and Stalker, G.M. (1961) The Management of Innovation, New York: Barnes & Noble.

Burt, R. S. (1992) Structural holes, Harvard University Press.

Burt, R. $. (2004) Structural holes and good ideas, American Journal of Sociology, 110(2): 349-
99,

Byrkjeflot, H., Mjøset, L., Mordhorst, M., and Petersen, K. (2022) The Making and Circulation
of Nordic Models, Ideas and Images, London: Taylor & Francis.

Caimo, A. and Lomi, A. (2015), Knowledge sharing in organizations: A Bayesian analysis of
the role of reciprocity and formal structure, Journal of Management, 41(2): 665-91.

Cairncross, F. and Cairncross, F. (1997) The Death of Distance: How the Communications
Revolution will Change our Lives, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Callon, M. (1986) Some elements of a sociology of translation: Domestication of the scallops
and the fishermen of St Brieu’s Bay, in J. Law (ed.), Power, Action and Belief. A New Sociology
of Knowledge? London: Routledge & Keegan Paul: 196-229.

Calsyn, R., Tornatzky, L.G., and Dittmar, S, (1977) Incomplete adoption of an innovation: The
case of goal attainment scaling, Evaluation, 4: 127-30.

Camac, M.K. and Glucksberg, S. (1984) Metaphors do not use associations between concepts,
they are used to create them, Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 13(6): 443-55.

Caminade, M. and Pym, A. (1998) Translator-training institutions, in M. Baker (ed.), Routledge
Encyclopedia of Translation Studies, London: Routledge: 280-5.

Camisön, C. and Forés, B. (2010) Knowledge absorptive capacity: New insights for its concep-
tualization and measurement, Journal of Business Research, 63(7): 707-15.

From smoke and mirrors to walking the talk: Decoupling

nagement Annals, 6(1): 483-530.
tonal learning and communities-of-practice;
Organization Science, 2(1):


References 257

Carayannis, E.G, Pirzadeh, A., and Popescu, D. (2011) Institutional Learning and Knowledge
Transfer Across Epistemic Communities: New Tools of Global Governance, New York: Springer
Science & Business Media.

Cardinal, LB, (2001) Technological innovation in the pharmaceutical industry: The use of
organizational control in managing research and development. Organization Science, 12(1):

Carlile, P. R. (2004) Transferring, translating, and transforming: An integrative frame-
work for managing knowledge across boundaries, Organization science, 15(5):
555-68.

Carpenter, M. A,, Li, M., and Jiang, H. (2012) Social network research in organizational con-
texts: A systematic review of methodological issues and choices, Journal of Management,
38(4): 1328-61.

Carrillo, F.J., Rivera-Vazquez, J.C., Ortiz-Fournier, L.V,, and Flores, ER. (2009) Overcoming
cultural barriers for innovation and knowledge sharing, Journal of Knowledge Management,
13(5): 257-70.

Carton, G. and Mouricou, P. (2017) Is management research relevant? A systematic analy-
sis of the rigor-relevance debate in top-tier journals (1994-2013), M@-n@-gement, 20(2):
166-203.

Cascio, W.F. and Montealegre, R. (2016) How technology is changing work and organizations,
Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 3: 349-75.

Castells, M. (2014) Technopoles of the world: The Making of 21st Century Industrial Complexes,
London: Routledge.

Castro, V.F.D. and Frazzon, E.M. (2017) Benchmarking of best practices: an overview of the
academic literature, Benchmarking: An International Journal, 24(3): 750-74.

Catford, J.C. (1965) A Linguistic Theory of Translation: An Essay in Applied Linguistics, Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.

Cave, D., Diehl, M., and Edwards, G. (2004) Truck Driver Invents Rock, Rolling Stone (951):
84-5,

Centola, D. (2018) How Behavior Spreads, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Cepiku, D. and Giordano, F. (2014) Co-Production in Developing Countries: Insights
from the community health workers experience, Public Management Review, 16(3):
317-40.

Chalmers, D.M. and Balan-Vnuk, E. (2013) Innovating not-for-profit social ventures: Explor-
ing the microfoundations of internal and external absorptive capacity routines, Interna-
tional Small Business Journal, 31(7): 785-810,

Chandler, D. and Hwang, H. (2015) Learning from learning theory: A model of organizational
adoption strategies at the microfoundations of institutional theory, Journal of Management,
41(5): 1446-76.

Chao, M.C.H. and Kumar, V. (2010) The impact of institutional distance on the international
diversity-performance relationship, Journal of World Business, 45(1): 93-103.

Chassin, M.R. (1998) Is health care ready for Six Sigma quality? The Milbank Quarterly, 76(4):

965-91,
Chatterjee, S., Lubatkin, M.H., Schweiger, D.M., and Weber, Y. (1992) Cultural differences

and shareholder value in related mergers: Linking equity and human capital, Strategic

Management Journal, 13(5): 319-34.
Chen, C.J. and Huang, J.W. (2007) How organizational climate and structure affect knowl-

edge management— The social interaction perspective, International Journal of Information

Management, 27(2): 104-18.
Chen, C.J., Huang, J.W., and Hsiao, Y.C. (2010) Knowledge management and innovativeness,

International Journal of Manpower, 31(8): 848-70.


258 References

Conceptual framework and statistical proce.

dt ieu, J.E. (2005)
Chen, G., Bliese, P.D. and Mathieu, | pe theories of homology, Organizational Research

|
ener dt Queen, R.J (2010) The impact of national cultures on structured
EN, Jay y Ledoy Jeg

14 (2): 228-42.
I of Knowledge Management, | ae
ee ition ere 2) The effects of absorptive capacity and decision speed on

organizational innovation: a study of organizational structure as an antecedent var iable,

h, 8(1): 27-50. No
Contemporary Management wey pos T. (2003) Reversibility, Aptness, and the

les, Metaphor and Symbol, 18(2): 85-105.
fstandardization and trust on franchisee' perfor-
s in the growth stage, Journal of Small

Chiappe, D.L., Kennedy, J.M. an |
Conventionality of Metaphors and Simi
Chiou, J.S. and Droge, C. (2015) The effects 0
mance and satisfaction: A study on franchise system

Business Management, 53(1): 129-44. | |
Chokki, T. (1986) A History of the Machine Tool Industry in Japan, in M. Fransman (ed.),
Machinery and Economic Development, London: Macmillan Press, 124-52

Christensen, T., Danielsen, O.A., Lægreid, P., and Rykkja, L. (2016) Comparing coordi-
ries, Public Administration, 94(2):

nation structures for crisis management in six count

316-32, aos
Christensen, T. and Lægreid, P. (2008) The challenge of coordination in central government

organizations: the Norwegian case, Public Organization Review, 8(2): 97-116. |
Christensen, T., Lægreid, P., and Røvik, K.A. (2020) Organization Theory and the Public sector,

Instrument, Culture, and Myth, London: Routledge.

Christensen, T. and Røvik, K.A. (1999) The ambiguity of appropriateness, in M, Egeberg
and P. Lægreid (eds.), Organizing Political Institutions: Essays for Johan P. Olsen, Oslo:
Universitetsforlaget, 159-80.

Chubb, A. (2015) China's Shanzhai culture: “Grabism” and the politics of hybridity, Journal of
Contemporary China, 24(92): 260-79.

Church, R., Outram, Q., and Smith, D.N. (1990) British coal mining strikes 1893-1940;
Dimensions, distribution and persistence, British Journal of Industrial Relations, 28(3):
329-49,

Ciabuschi, E, Dellestrand, H., and Kappen, P. (2011) Exploring the effects of vertical and lat-
eral mechanisms in international knowledge transfer projects, Management International
Review, 51(2): 129-55.

Ciuk, S. and James, P. (2015) Interlingual translation and the transfer of value-infused
practices: an in-depth qualitative exploration, Management Learning, 46(5): 565-81.

Clarence-Smith, K. (2007) Copying in Japanese magazines: unashamed copiers, in R. Cox
(ed.), The Culture of Copying in Japan, New York: Routledge: 63-80.

Clark, B.R. (1972) The organizational saga in higher education, Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 17(2): 178-84.

Clark, T., Floyd, S.W. and Wright, M. (2013) In search of the impactful and the interesting:
Swings of the pendulum? Journal of Management Studies, 50(8): 1358-73.

Clark, T.A. and Fincham, R. (2002) Critical Consulting: New Perspectives on the Management
Advice Industry, Oxford: Blackwell.

Claus, L., Greenwood, R., and Mgoo, J. (2021) Institutional translation gone wrong: The case

of villages for Africa in rural Tanzania, Academy of Management Journal, 64(5): 1497-526.
https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2017.1089

Claver-Cortés E., Marco-Lajara, B., Manresa-Marhuenda, E., Garcia-Lillo, F., and Seva-

Larossa, P. (2017) Location decisions and agglomeration economies: Domestic and foreign
companies, Journal of Regional Research, 39: 99-135.


References 259

oo } csi pe PENE Japanese architectural models at the Vienna exhi-
ition an apan British exhibition, in R. Cox (ed. ing i
New York: Routledge: 211-24, ee en ee pe

Cobb, M. (2015) Lifes Greatest Secret. The Race to Crack the Genetic Code, London: Profile
Books LTD.

Cochrane, A.L. (1972) Effectiveness and Efficiency: Random Reflections on Health Services,
London: Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust.

Coff, RW, ar D.C, and Eastvold, R. (2006) The knowledge-leveraging paradox: How to
actevs scale without making knowledge imitable, Academy of Management Review, 31(2):

Cohen, B.P. (1989) Developing sociological knowledge: Theory and method (2nd ed.), Chicago,
IL: Nelson- Hall.

Cohen, M.D., March, J.G., and Olsen, J.P. (197 2) A garbage can model of organizational choice,
Administrative Science Quarterly, 17(1): 1-25.

Cohen, W.M. and Levinthal, D.A. (1989) Innovation and learning: the two faces of R & D., The
Economic Journal, 99(397): 569-96,

Cohen, W.M. and Levinthal, D.A. (1990) Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning
and innovation, Administrative Science Quarterly, 35 (1): 128-52.

Cohen, W.M. and Levinthal, D.A. (1994) Fortune favors the prepared firm, Management
Science, 40(2): 227-51.

Cole, C. (1993) Shannon revisited: Information in terms of uncertainty, Journal of the American
Society for Information Science, 44(4): 204-11.

Collins, D. (2019) Managements gurus, in A. Sturdy, S. Heusinkveld, T. Reay, and D. Strang
(eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Management Ideas, Oxford: Oxford University Press:
216-31.

Collins, H. (2010) Tacit and Explicit Knowledge, London: University of Chicago Press.

Colquitt, J.A. and Zapata-Phelan, C.P. (2007) Trends in theory building and theory testing:
A five-decade study of the Academy of Management Journal, Academy of Management

Journal, 50(6): 1281-303.
Conner, K.R. (1995) Obtaining strategic advantage from being imitated: When can encourag-

ing “clones” pay? Management Science, 41(2): 209-25.
Contractor, N.S. and Monge, P.R. (2002) Managing knowledge networks, Management Com-

munication Quarterly, 16(2): 249-58.
Cooke, P. (2001) Regional innovation systems, clusters, and the knowledge economy, Industrial

and Corporate Change, 10(4): 945-74.
Cooke, P., Uranga, M.G., and Etxebarria, G. (1997) Regional innovation systems: Institutional

and organisational dimensions, Research Policy, 26(4-5): 475-91.

Cooren, E and Seidl, D. (2020) Niklas Luhmann’s radical communication approach and
its implications for research on organizational communication, Academy of Management
Review, 45(2): 479-97.

Cordön-Pozo, E., Garcia-Morales, V.J, and Aragön-Correa, J.A. (2006) Inter-departmental
collaboration and new product development success: a study on the collaboration between
marketing and R&D in Spanish high-technology firms, International Journal of Technology

Management, 35(1/2/3/4): 52-79.
Corley, K.G. and Gioia, D.A. (2011) Building theory about theory building: what constitutes a

theoretical contribution? Academy of Management Review, 36(1): 12-32.
Cornelissen, J. (2017) Editor's comments: Developing propositions, a process model, or a
typology? Addressing the challenges of writing theory without a boilerplate, Academy of

Management Review, 42 (1): 1-9.

TED SEE EEE OE EEE ——


260 References

Cornelissen, J., and Durand, R. (2012) More than just novelty: Conceptual blending and
causality, Academy of Management Review, 37(1): 152-54, |

Cornelissen, J., Höllerer, M. A., and Seidl, D. (2021) What theory is and can be: Forms of
theorizing in organizational scholarship, Organization Theory, 203): 26317877211020328,

Cornelissen, J.P. (2005) Beyond compare: Metaphor in organization theory, Academy of
Management Review, 30(4): 751-64. | |

Cornelissen, J.P., and Durand, R. (2014) Moving forward: Developing theoretical contribu-
tions in management studies, Journal of Management Studies, 51(6): 995-1022.

Cornelissen, J.P. and Kafouros, M. (2008) The emergent organization: Primary and complex
metaphors in theorizing about organizations, Organization Studies 29(7): 957 -78. |

Costumato, L. (2021) Collaboration among public organizations: Å systematic literature
review on determinants of institutional performance, International Journal of Public Sector
Management, 34(3): 247-73. https://doi.org/10.1108/ [JPSM-03-2020-0069

Cowan, R. and Jonard, N. (2004) Network structure and the diffusion of knowledge, Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control, 28(8): 1557-75.

Cox, R. (2007) Introduction, in R. Cox (ed.) The Culture of Copying in Japan: Critical and
Historical Perspectives, New York: Routledge: 1-17.

Craig, R.T. (1999) Communication theory as a field, Communication theory, 9(2): 119-61,

Cressey, D.R. (1959) Contradictory directives in complex organizations: The case of the prison,
Administrative Science Quarterly, 4(1): 1-19.

Cross, R., Parker, A., Prusak, L., and Borgatti, S.P. (2001) Knowing what we know: Support-
ing knowledge creation and sharing in social networks, Organizational Dynamics, 30(2):
100-20.

Crossan, M.M. and Inkpen, A.C. (1995) The subtle art of learning through alliances, Business
Quarterly, 60(2): 68-78.

Crucini, C. and Kipping, M. (2001) Management consultants as global change agents? Evi-
dence from Italy, Journal of Organizational Change Management, 14: 570-89.

Cummings, J.L. and Teng, B.S. (2003) Transferring R&D knowledge: The key factors affecting
knowledge transfer success, Journal of Engineering and Technology Management, 20(1-2):
39-68.

Cummings, T.G. (2007) Quest for an engaged Academy, Academy of Management Review,
32(2): 355-60.

Curvelo, A. (2007) Copy to convert: Jesuits missionary practice in Japan, in R. Cox (ed.),
The Culture of Copying in Japan: Gritical and Historical Perspectives, New York: Routledge:
111-27.

Cushman, D. and Whiting, G.C. (1972) An approach to communication theory: Toward
consensus on rules, Journal of Communication, 22(3): 217-38.

Cyert, R.M. and March, J.G. (1963) A Behavioral Theory of the Firm, New Jersey: Englewood
Cliffs.

Czarniawska, B. (2014) A theory of organizing, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Czarniawska, B. and Joerges, B. (1996) Travels of Ideas, in Czarniawska, B. and Sevön, G. (eds.),
Translating Organizational Change, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter: 13-48.

Czarniawska, B. and Mazza, C. (2013) Consulting university: A reflection from inside, Finan-
cial Accountability & Management, 29(2): 124-39.

Czarniawska, B. and Sevön, G. (1996) Introduction, in B. Czarniawska and G. Sevön (eds.),
Translating Organizational Change, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter: 1-12.

Czarniawska, B. and Sevön, G. (2005) Translation is a vehicle, imitation its motor, and fashion
sits at the wheel, in B. Czarniawska and G. Sevön (eds.), Global ideas: How Ideas, Objects

and Practices Travel in the Global Economy, Malmo: Liber & Copenhagen Business School
Press: 7-14.


References 261

D'Adderio, L. (2014) The replication dilemma unravelled: How organizations enact multiple
goals in routine transfer, Organization Science, 25(5): 1325-50

Darwin, C., Fitzroy, R., and King, P.P. (1839) Narrative of the Surveying Voyages of His Majesty's
Ships Adventure and Beagle, Between the Years 1826 and 1836: Describing Their Examination
of the Southern Shores of South America, and the Beagles Circumnavigation of the Globe,
London: Henry Colburn.

Davenport, LH, De Long, D.W., and Beers, M.C, (1998) Successful knowledge management
projects, Sloan Management Review, 39(2): 43-57.

Davenport, T.H. and Prusak, L. (1998) Working Knowledge: How Organizations Manage What
They Know, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Davidson, W.H. (1980) The location of foreign direct investment activity: country charac-
er and the theory of the firm, Journal of International Business Studies, 12 (Fall):

Davies, A.J. and Kochhar, A.K. (2002) Manufacturing best practice and performance studies:
a critique, International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 22(3): 289-305.

Davis, M.S. (1971) That's interesting! Towards a phenomenology of sociology and a sociology
of phenomenology, Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 1(2): 309-44.

De Clercq, D., Dimov, D., and Thongpapanl, N. (2013) Organizational social capital, for-
malization, and internal knowledge sharing in entrepreneurial orientation formation,
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 37(3): 505-37.

De Long, D.W. and Fahey, L. (2000) Diagnosing cultural barriers to knowledge management.
Academy of Management Perspectives, 14(4): 113-27.

Delios, A. and Beamish, P.W. (1999) Geographic scope, product diversification, and the
corporate performance of Japanese firms. Strategic Management Journal, 20(8): 711-27.

Demir, R. and Fjellström, D. (2012) Translation of relational practices in an MNC subsidiary:
Symmetrical, asymmetrical and substitutive strategies, Asian Business & Management,
11(4): 369-93.

Denison, D.R. (1990) Corporate Culture and Organizational Effectiveness, New York: John

Wiley & Sons.
DesForges, C.D. (1986) US and UK experience in technology transfer. A comparative analysis,

International Journal of Technology Management, 1(3-4): 457-75.

Dhanaraj, C., Lyles, M.A., Steensma, H.K., and Tihanyi, L. (2004) Managing tacit and explicit
knowledge transfer in IJVs: the role of relational embeddedness and the impact on perfor-
mance, Journal of International Business Studies, 35(5): 428-42.

Diefenbach, T. (2009) New public management in public sector organizations: the dark sides
of managerialistic “enlightenment,” Public Administration, 87(4): 892-909.

Dikova, D. and Van Witteloostuijn, A. (2007) Foreign direct investment mode choice: entry
and establishment modes in transition economies, Journal of International Business Studies,

38(6): 1013-33.
Dima, A. M., and Vasilache, S. (2015). Social network analysis for tacit knowledge manage-

ment in universities, Journal of the Knowledge Economy, 6(4): 856-64.
Dixon, N.M. (2000) Common knowledge: How Companies Thrive by Sharing What They Know,

Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Dohan, D. and Levintova, M. (2007) Barriers beyond words: cancer, culture, and translation
in a community of Russian speakers, Journal of General Internal Medicine, 22(2): 300-5.
Dosi, G. and Marengo, L. (1993) Some elements of an evolutionary theory of organizational

com- potencies, in R. W. England (ed.), Evolutionary Concepts in Contemporary Economics,

Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press: 234-74.
Doty, D.H. and Glick, W.H. (1994) Typologies as a unique form of theory building: Toward

improved understanding and modeling, Academy of Management Review, 19(2): 230-51.


262 References

When it comes to product innovation, what ig

. , (1995
Dougherty, D. and Corse, S.M ( fs of High Technology Management Research, 6(1).

so bad about bureaucracy? The Journ

99-76. ising technologies fa;
| | - and Park, J.R. (2001) Why promising gies fail: the
Douthwaite, B., Keatinge, J.D.H., an ring adoption, Research Policy, 30(5): 819-36,

f user innovation du | |
: gy poe A.S. (1999) Managing Overseas Assignments to Build Organiza.
Kn anning, 22(4): 33-48.

tional Knowledge, Human Resource Pl
Downs, A. (1995) Corporate Executions, New York: — nian |
Drago, R. (1988) Quality circle survival: Ån exploratory analysis, INAUSiria Relations: A

» 336-51.
Journal of Economy and Society, 27(3): 336 5 |
Drucker, å (1971) wha we can learn from Japanese management, Harvard Business Review,
March-April: 110-22.
Drucker, P.F. (1988) The coming 0

45-53, os
Duchek, S. (2013) Capturing absorptive capacity: A critical review and future prospects.

Schmalenbach Business Review, 65(3): 312-29. |
Duranti, R. (1998) Italian tradition, in M. Baker (ed.), The Routledge Encyclopedia of Transla-

tion Studies, London and New York: Routledge: 459-68. |

Dyer, J. H., and Nobeoka, K. (2000) Creating and managing a high-performance knowledge-
sharing network: the Toyota case, Strategic Management Journal, 21(3): 345-67.

Easterby-Smith, M., Graca, M., Antonacopoulou, E., and Ferdinand, J. (2008) Absorptive
capacity: A process perspective, Management learning, 39(5): 483-501.

Easterlin, R.A. (1974) Does economic growth improve the human lot? Some empirical evi-
dence, in P.A. David and M.W. Reder (eds.), Nations and Households in Economic Growth,
New York, Academic Press: 89-125.

Easterlin, R.A., Morgan, R., Switek, M., and Wang, F. (2012) China's life satisfaction, 1990-
2010, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(25): 9775-80.

Editorial, (23 July 1965) On Mavor and Coulson, Ltd., Colliery Guardian.

Edquist, C. (1997) Systems of Innovation: Technologies, Institutions, and Organizations, Lon-
don: Routledge.

Egeberg, M. (2007) How bureaucratic structure matters: An organizational perspective, in G.
Peters and J. Pierre (eds.), The Handbook of Public Administration, Thousand Oaks, CA:
SAGE Publications: 77-87.

Egeberg, M. and Trondal, J. (2018) An Organizational Approach to Public Governance: Under-
standing and Design, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Eijnatten, F.V. (1998) Developments in socio-technical systems design, Handbook of Work and
Organizational Psychology, 4, Hove: Psychology Press: 61-88.

Elliott, J.E. (1978) Marx’s socialism in the context of his typology of economic systems, Journal
of Comparative Economics, 2(1): 25-41.

Ellis, R. and Oakley-Brown, L. (2001) Translation and Nation: Towards a Cultural Politics of
Englishness, New York: Tonawanda.

Elmore, R.F. (1979) Backward mapping: Implementation research and policy decisions, Polit-
ical Science Quarterly, 94(4): 601-16.

Elvbakken, K.T. and Hansen, H.F. (2019) Evidence producing organizations: Organizational
translation of travelling evaluation ideas, Evaluation, 25(3): 261-76.

Empson, L. (2001) Fear of exploitation and fear of contamination: Impediments to knowl-
edge transfer in mergers between professional service firms, Human Relations, 54(7):
839-62.

Engwall, L., and Kipping, M. (2013) Management consulting: dynamics, debates, and direc-
tions, International Journal of Strategic Communication, 7(2): 84-98.

f the new organization, Harvard Business Review, 66(1):


References 263

Enkel, E., Groemminger, A,, and Heil, S. (2018) Managing technological distance in inter-
nal and external collaborations: absorptive Capacity routines and social integration for
innovation, The Journal of Technology Transfer, 43(5): 1257-90.

Ensign, PC, Lin, C.D, Chreim, S., and Persaud, A. (2014) Proximity, knowledge trans-
fer, and innovation in technology-based mergers and acquisitions, International Journal of
Technology Management, 66(1): 1-31,

Ercek, M. and Say, A.I. (2008) Discursive ambiguity, professional networks, and peripheral
contexts: the translation of total quality management in Turkey, 1991-2002, International
Studies of Management and Organization, 38(4): 78-99,

Erhardt, N., Martin-Rios, C., and Harkins, J. (2014) Knowledge flow from the top: the impor-
ange or teamwork structure in team sports, European Sport Management Quarterly, 14(4):

Erkelens, R., van den Hooff, B., Huysman, M., and Vlaar, P. (2015) Learning from locally
embedded knowledge: Facilitating organizational learning in geographically dispersed
settings, Global Strategy Journal, 5(2): 177-97,

Erlingsdottir, G. and Lindberg, K. (2005) Isomorphism, isopraxism, and isonymism: com-
plementary or competing processes? in Czarniawska, B. and Sevön G. (eds.), Global Ideas.
How Ideas, Objects and Practices Travel in the Global Economy, Malmø: Liber & Copenhagen
Business School Press: 47-70.

Escribano, A., Fosfuri, A., and Tribö, J.A. (2009) Managing external knowledge flows: The
moderating role of absorptive capacity, Research Policy, 38(1): 96-105.

Estes, W.K. (1970) Learning theory and mental development, New York: Academic Press.

Etzioni, A. (1961) Å comparative Analysis of Complex Organizations: On Power, Involvement,
and their Correlates, New York: The Free Press of Glencoe.

Fabbro, F. (2001) The bilingual brain: Cerebral representation of languages, Brain and Lan-
guage, 79(2): 211-22.

Fabrizio, K.R. (2009) Absorptive capacity and the search for innovation, Research Policy, 38(2):
255-67.

Faems, D., Bos, B., Noseleit, F., and Leten, B. (2020) Multistep Knowledge Transfer in Multi-
national Corporation Networks: When do Subsidiaries Benefit from Unconnected Sister
Alliances? Journal of Management, 46(3): 414-42.

Fahy, K.M., Easterby-Smith, M., and Lervik, J.E. (2014) The power of spatial and temporal
orderings in organizational learning, Management Learning, 45(2): 123-44.

Fang, S.C., Yang, C.W., and Hsu, W.Y. (2013) Inter-organizational knowledge transfer: the
perspective of knowledge governance, Journal of Knowledge Management, 17(6): 943-57.
Farh, C.I., Bartol, K.M., Shapiro, D.L., and Shin, J. (2010) Networking abroad: A process model
of how expatriates form support ties to facilitate adjustment, Academy of Management

Review, 35(3): 434-54.

Farquharson, M., Ortenblad, A., and Hsu, S.W. (2014) Trusting local translation: Experiences
from transplanting a “Made in Britain” entrepreneurship course in China, Management
Learning, 45(2): 182-99.

Farrell, C.C., Coburn, C.E., and Chong, S. (2019) Under what conditions do school dis-
tricts learn from external partners? The role of absorptive capacity, American Educational

Research Journal, 56(3): 955-94.
Fauconnier, G., and Turner, M. (2002) Conceptual blending and the mind' hidden complexities,

New York: Basic Books.
Fauconnier, G. and Turner, M. (1998) Conceptual integration networks, Cognitive Science,

22(2): 133-87.
Fawcett, P. (1998) Ideology and translation, in M. Baker (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of

Translation Studies, London: Routledge, 106-10.


TRENET

264 References

Feldman, M.s and Pentland, B. (2003) Reconceptualizing organizational routines as a soype,
feldman, M, å y De

‘er ie, Ao) IUZ y dry ) *)

t Journal, 48(1): 117-34,
INK, \. =

Resource Planning, 28(4): 30-7.
Finstad, B. P. (2005) Finotro: stats
avvikling (Translation: Finotro:
Troms: from plan to termination),
Riss, PC. (2011) Building better causa
organization research, Academy of Managemen
Fleming, L. (2001) Recombinant uncertainty in tec
47(1): 117-32.
Flor, M.L., Cooper, S.Y., and Oltra, M.J. (2018
ity and radical innovation in high-technology

183-94. en
Florida, R. and Kenney, M. (1991) Transplanted organizations: The transfer of Japanese

industrial organization to the US, American Sociological Review, 56: 381-98.
Floyd, S.W. (2009) Borrowing theory. What does this Mean and When does it Make Sense in

Management Scholarship? Journal of Management Studies, 46(6): 1057-58.
Foos, T., Schum, G., and Rothenberg, S. (2006) Tacit knowledge transfer and the knowledge

disconnect, Journal of Knowledge Management, 10(1): 6-18.

Forgatch, M.S. and DeGarmo, D.S. (201 1) Sustaining fidelity following the nationwide PMTO"
implementation in Norway, Prevention Science, 12(3): 235-46.

Forrester, R. H. (2000) Capturing learning and applying knowledge: an investigation of the
use of innovation teams in Japanese and American automotive firms, Journal of Business
Research, 47(1), 35-45.

Fortwengel, J. (2017) Understanding when MNCs can overcome institutional distance: A
research agenda, Management International Review, 57(6): 793-814.

Foss, N.J. (2011) Why micro-foundations for resource-based theory are needed and what they
may look like, Journal of Management, 37(5): 1413-28.

Foss, N., and Pedersen, T. (2001, September), Building a MNC knowledge structure: the role
of knowledge sources, complementarities and organizational context, In LINK Conference,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Fox, O. (2000) The use of translation diaries in a process-oriented translation teaching
methodology, Benjamins Translation Library, 38: 115-30.

Francis, G. and Holloway, J. (2007) What have we learned? Themes from the literature on
best-practice benchmarking, International Journal of Management Reviews, 9(3): 171-89,
Fredrickson J.W. (1986) The strategic decision process and organizational structure, Academy

of Management Review, 11(2): 280-97,

Freeman, L. C. (1977) A set of measures of centrality based on betweennes, Sociometry, 40:
35-41,

Frenkel, M. (2005a) Something new, something old, something borrowed: the cross-national
translation of the “family friendly” organization in Israel, in B. Czarniawska and G. Sevön
(eds.), Global Ideas. How Ideas, Objects and Practices Travel in the Global economy. Malmø:
Liber & Copenhagen Business School Press: 147-66.

Frenkel, M. (2005b) The politics of translation: how state-level political relations affect the
cross-national travel of management ideas, Organization, 12(2): 275-301.

Frenkel, M. (2008) The Americanization of the antimanagerialist alternative in Israel, Interna-
tional Studies of Management and Organization, 38: 17-37.

eid fiskeindustri i Finnmark og Nord-Troms: fra plan ti
State-owned fish industry in Finnmark and Northern.
Ph.D. thesis, Tromsø: University of Tromsø.

| theories: A fuzzy set approach to typologies in
t Journal, 54(2): 393-420.

hnological search, Management Science

) External knowledge search, absorptive capac.
firms, European Management Journal, 36(2)

å
‘


References 265

The impact of network structure on knowledge

kK analysis in th | | |
networks. The Annals of Regional Science, 44(1): 21-38 € context of regional innovation

Frost, T.S., Birkinshaw, J.M. and Ensign, PC (2002) C
' A ) i > ent å ‘ 1
corporations, Strategic Management Journal, 23: 997-1018 scivapadant ae

Fruin, oe JK, Adler, PS., and Adler, PS (1999) Remade in America: Trans-

planting and Transforming Japanese Management Systems, Oxford, UK: Oxford University
ress.

Fu, X., Fu, X. M., Ghauri, P., and Hou, J, (2022), International collaboration and innovation:

“og from a leading Chinese multinational enterprise, Journal of World Business, 57(4):

Furusten, S. (1999) Popular Management Books, London: Routledge.

Galbraith, J.R. (1973) Designing Complex Organizations, Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Galbreath, J. (2019) Drivers of green innovations: The impact of export intensity, women
leaders, and absorptive capacity, Journal of Business Ethics, 158(1): 47-61. ;

Gambier, Y. and Van Doorslaer, L. (2010) Handbook of Translation Studies, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins Publishing.

Ganguly, A., Talukdar, A., and Chatterjee, D. (2019) Evaluating the role of social capital, tacit

knowledge sharing, knowledge quality and reciprocity in determining innovation capability
of an organization, Journal of Knowledge Management, 23(6): 1105-35.

Gargiulo, M. and Benassi, M. (2000) Trapped in your own net? Network cohesion, structural
holes, and the adaptation of social capital, Organization Science, 11(2): 183-96.

Gebauer, H., Worch, H., and Truffer, B. (2012) Absorptive capacity, learning processes and
combinative capabilities as determinants of strategic innovation, European Management
Journal, 30(1): 57-73.

Geertz, C. (1973) The interpretation of cultures, New York: Basic Books.

Geest, S.V.D. and Whyte, S.R. (1989) The charm of medicines: metaphors and metonyms,
Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 3(4): 345-67.

Gentner, D. (1982) Are scientific analogies metaphors? in D. Miall (ed.), Metaphor: Problems
and Perspectives, Brighton: Harvester: 106-32.

Gentner, D. (1983) Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy, Cognitive Science,

7: 155-70.
Georgeff, M.P. and Lansky, A.L. (1986) Procedural knowledge, Proceedings of the IEEE, 74(10):

1383-98.

Gertler, M.S. (2003) Tacit knowledge and the economic geography of context, or the undefin-
able tacitness of being (there) Journal of Economic Geography, 3(1): 75-99.

Ghoshal, S. and Bartlett, C.A. (1990) The multinational corporation as an interorganizational

network, Academy of Management Review, 15(4): 603-26.
Ghoshal, S. and Gratton, L. (2002) Integrating the Enterprise, MIT Sloan Management Review,

44(1): 31-8.
Ghoshal, S., Korine, H., and Szulanski, G. (1994) Interunit communication in multinational

corporations. Management Science, 40(1): 96-110.
Gilbert, D. and Wong, R.K. (2003) Passenger expectations and airline services: a Hong Kong

based study, Tourism Management, 24(5): 519-32.

Gile, D. (1990) Scientific Research vs. Personal Theories in the Investigation of Interpre-
tation, in L. Gran and C. Taylor (eds.), Aspects of Experimental Research on Conference
Interpretation, Udine: Campanotto: 28-41.

Gill, M.J., McGivern, G., Sturdy, A., Pereira, S., Gill, D.J., and Dopson, $. (2020) Nego-
tiating Imitation: Examining the interactions of consultants and clients to understand

institutionalization as translation, British Journal of Management, 31: 470-86.


266 References

(2017) A net of friends: Investigating friendship by

Gillath, O., Karantzas, G.C., and Selcu etwork analysis, Personality and Social Psychology

integrating attachment theory and social n
Bulletin, 43(11): 1546-65. |
Giroux, H. and Taylor, J.R. (2002) The j

uality, Management Learning, 33(4): 497-517. |
Glover y and Wilkinson, A. (2007) Worlds colliding: The translation of modern management

practices within a UK based subsidiary ofa Korean-owned MNG, The International Journq]

of Human Resource Management, 18(8): 1437-55. | | |
AG J.H. (1959) Technical organization as å factor in supervisor-worker conflict: Some
preliminary observations on a study made in

Sociology, 10(3): 213-30. | | å
Gölgeci, El Kuivalainen, O. (2020) Does social capital matter for supply chain resilience?

The role of absorptive capacity and marketing-supply chain management alignment, Indys-

trial Marketing Management, 84: 63-74. oe
Gond, J.P. and Boxenbaum, E. (2013) The glocalization of responsible investment: Contexty-

alization work in France and Quebec, Journal of Business Ethics, 115(4): 707-21. |
Grady, J., Oakley, T., and Coulson, S. (1999) Blending and metaphor, Amsterdam Studies in the

Theory and History of Linguistic Science Series, 4: 101-24. dn
Graham, I.D. and Logan, J. (2004) Translating research-innovations in knowledge transfer and
continuity of care, Canadian Journal of Nursing Research Archive, 36(2): 89-104.

Granas, A.G., Nørgaard, L.S., and Sporrong, S.K. (2014) Lost in translation? Comparing three
Scandinavian translations of the Beliefs about Medicines Questionnaire, Patient Education

and Counseling, 96(2): 216-21.

Grandi, A. and Grimaldi, R. (2005) Academics' organizational characteristics and the genera-
tion of successful business ideas, Journal of Business Venturing, 20(6): 821-45.

Granovetter, M. (1985) Economic action and social structure: The problem of embeddedness,
American Journal of Sociology, 91(3): 481-510.

Granovetter, M.S. (1973) The strength of weak ties, American Journal of Sociology, 78(6):

1360-80.
Granovetter, M. (1992) Economic institutions as social constructions: a framework for analy-

sis, Acta Sociologica, 35(1): 3-11.

Granstrand, O. (2000) The Economics and Management of Intellectual Property, London:
Edward Elgar.

Grant, R. M. (1996) Toward a knowledge-based theory of the firm, Strategic Management
Journal, 17(S2), 109-22.

Greenwood R., Oliver, C., Sahlin, K., and Suddaby, R. (2008) Introduction, in R. Green-
wood, C. Oliver, K. Sahlin, and R. Suddaby (eds.), The Sage Handbook of Organizational
Institutionalism, London: SAGE Publications: 1-46,

Greve, C., Ejersbo, N., Lægreid, P., and Rykkja, L.H. (2020) Unpacking Nordic administrative
reforms: Agile and adaptive governments, International Journal of Public Administration,
43(8): 697-710.

Griffith, D.A., Kiessling, T.S., and Dabic, M. (2005) An exploratory examination into the

challenges to technology transfer in the transitional economy of Croatia, Thunderbird
International Business Review, 47(2): 163-81.

Grol, R. (2001) Successes and failures in the implementation of evidence-based guidelines for
clinical practice, Medical Care, 39(8): 1146-54.

Grol, R. and Grimshaw, J. (2003) From best evidence to best practice: effective implementation
of change in patients’ care, The Lancet, 362(9391): 1225-30.

Grosjean, F. (1982) Life with Two Languages: An Introduction to Bilingualism, Cambridge MA:
Harvard University Press.

ustification of knowledge: tracking the translation of

the mining industry, The British Journal of


References 267

Grosjean, F. (2010) Bilingual, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Pr
ess,

Guest, D.E. (2007) Dont shoot the mess |
Management Journal, 50(5): 1020-26 enger: Å wake-up call for academic, Academy of
Gulati, R. (2007) Tent poles, tribalism, and b
| and boundary spanning: The rigor-rel |
AT Academy of Management Journal, 504) 775-81 ee
— a - the Å Jå ra theory of organization, in L. Gulick, and L.F. Urwick (eds.),
a E ge ae å gap Institute of Public Administration, New York, NY.
dation: Southern Euro its a and uhle, H.J. (1995) The Politics of Democratic Consoli-
—_ pe in Comparative Perspective, Baltimore and London: John Hopki
University Press. on: John Hopkins

Gupta, A.K. and Govindarajan, V. (1994) Organiz; me
International Business Review, 3(4): pg pag ganizing for knowledge flows within MNCs,

Gupta, A.K. and Govindarajan, V. (2000) Knowledge fl thi — |
EN ge flows within multinational corporations.

Hackney, R,, Desouza, Ka and Loebbecke, C. (2005) Cooperation or competition: knowledge
sharing processes in Inter-organizational networks, in $. Hawamdeh (ed.), Knowledge Man-
— Nurturing Culture, Innovation and Technology, Singapore: World Scientific Press:

a D. rå srr 2 ns Toward a Better Understanding of Tacit Knowl-
edge in Organizations: laking Stock and Moving Forward, Acad
ce pa g cademy of Management Annals,

Haedicke, M.A. (2012) Keeping our mission, changing our system: translation and organiza-
tional change in natural foods co-ops, The Sociological Quarterly, 53(1): 44-67.

Hage, J. (1965) An axiomatic theory of organizations, Administrative Science Quarterly, 1063):

289-320.
Hage, J. (1975) Occupations and the Social Structure, New Jersey: Englewood Cliffs, Prentice

Hall.
Hage, J. (1980) Theories of Organizations: Form, Process, and Transformation, John Wiley &

Sons.
Hage, J. and Aiken, M. (1967) Relationship of centralization to other structural properties,

Administrative Science Quarterly, 12(1): 72-92.
Hagopian, F. and Mainwaring, S.P. (2005) The Third Wave of Democratization in Latin America:

Advances and Setbacks, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Håkanson, L. (2005) Epistemic communities and cluster dynamics: On the role of knowledge

in industrial districts, Industry and Innovation, 12(4): 433-63.
Hall, R. (1987) Organizations. Structures, Processes & Outcomes, New Jersey: Prentice Hall,

Englewood Cliffs.
Halldin-Herrgard, T. (2000) Difficulties in diffusion of tacit knowledge in organizations, The

Journal of Intellectual Capital, 1(4): 357-65.
Halliday, M.A.K., McIntosh, A., and Strevens, P. (1964) The Linguistic Sciences and Language

Teaching, London: Longman.
Hambrick, D.C. (1984) Taxonomic approaches to studying strategy: Some conceptual and

methodological issues, Journal of Management, 10(1): 27-41.
Hambrick, D.C. (1994) What if the academy actually mattered? Academy of Management

Review, 19(1): 11-6.
Hanafizadeh, P. and Ghamkhari, F. (2019) Elicitation of tacit knowledge using soft systems

methodology, Systemic Practice and Action Research, 32(5): 521-55,
Hannerz, U. (1996) Transnational connections: Culture, people, places, New York: Routledge.

Hansen, H.F, (2014) Organization of evidence-based knowledge production: Evidence hierar-
chies and evidence typologies, Scandinavian Journal of Public Health, 42: 11-7.


268 References

Hansen, H.F. and Rieper, (), (2009) ‘The evidence movement: the development and conse-

| | luation, 1502): 141-63.
uences of methodologies in review practices, Eva ig |
en M.T. (1999) The search-transfer problem: The role of weak ties in sharing knowledg ,
across organization subunits, Administrative Science Quarter ly, 44(1): 82-11 å |
Hansen, M.T. (2002) Knowledge networks: Explaining effective knowledge sharing in multiy.

nit companies, Organization Sciences 1303): 232-48. | |
Hareide, HL 11968) Sidelengn ‘ Sanden: Førti Måneder med det Norske Prosjektet i Kerala

(Sideways in the Sand: Forty Months with the Norwegian Project in Kerala), Oslo: Det Norske
Sam |

Harré. ak Secord, P.E. (1972) The Explanation of Social Behavior, Oxford, UK: Blackwell,

Harris, W.A. (1997) On scope conditions in sociological theories, Social and Economic Studies,
46(4): 123-27. | |

Harrison, M. (2016) The decline of the traditional expat? (https://www.eca-international.com/
insights/articles/may-2016/ the-decline-of-the-traditional-expat). |

Harrison, T, (2000) Urban policy: addressing wicked problems, in H.TO. Davies, S.M, Nutley,
and P.C. Smith (eds.), What Works? Evidence-based Policy and Practice in Public Services,
Bristol: Policy Press: 207-28. |

Hauan, A. (2000) Kunnskap i Kontekst. Betydningen av kunnskap i kontekst for samhandling
i økonomiske verdikjeder (Knowledge in context: The importance of knowledge in context
for cooperation in economic value chains), Bodø, Nord University: Working paper 8/2000,

Haugen, E.1. (1956) Bilingualism in the Americas: Å Bibliography and Research Guide, Alabama:
University of Alabama Press.

Heckathorn, D.D. and Cameron, C.J. (2017) Network sampling: From snowball and multiplic-
ity to respondent-driven sampling, Annual Review of Sociology, 43: 101-19.

Hedlund, G. and Zander, U. (1993) Architectonic and List-like Knowledge Structuring: Cri-
tique of Modern Concepts of Knowledge Management. Research Paper 1993/2. Institute of
International Business, Stockholm School of Economics.

Hedmo, T., Sahlin-Andersson, K., and Wedlin, L. (2005) Fields of imitation: The global expan-
sion of management education, in B. Czarniawska and G. Sevön (eds.), Global Ideas: How
Ideas, Objects and Practices Travel in the Global Economy, Malmø: Liber & Copenhagen
Business School Press: 190-212.

Heeley, M. (1997) Appropriating rents from external knowledge: the impact of absorptive

capacity on firm sales growth and research productivity, Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research, 17: 390-404

Helfat, C.E., Finkelstein, S., Mitchell, W., Peteraf, M., Singh, H., Teece, D, and Winter, S. (2007)
Dynamic Capabilities: Understanding Strategic Change in Organizations, London: Blackwell.

Helfat, C.E. and Peteraf, M.A. (2003) The dynamic resource-based view: Capability lifecycles,
Strategic Management Journal, 24(10): 997-1010.

Helin, S. and Sandström, J. (2010) Resisting a corporate code of ethics and the reinforcement
of management control, Organization Studies, 31(5): 583-604.

Helper, S., MacDufhe, J.P. Pil, F., Sako, M., Takeishi, A., and Warburton, M. (1999) Mod-
ularization and Outsourcing: Implications for the future of automotive assembly, Paper
presented at the IMVP Annual Forum, MIT, Boston, 6-7 October.

Hendry, J. (2000) The Orient Strikes Back: A global view of cultural display, London: Routledge.

Henry, E. and Ponce, C.J. (2011) Waiting to imitate: on the dynamic pricing of knowledge,
Journal of Political Economy, 119(5): 959-81,

Hermans, T. (1985/2014) The Manipulation of Literature (Routledge Revivals) Studies in
Literary Translation. London: Routledge.

Hermans, T. (2013) What is (not) translation? In M. Baker (ed.), The Routledge Handbook of
Translation Studies, London: Routledge: 93-105.

— vb a a


References 269

Hernes, T. (2014) A Process Theory of Organization, Oxford: Oxford University Press

Hersey, P. and Blanchard, K, H. (1969) M | er
Human Resources, New dd Polskie of Organizational Behavior— Utilizing

Heusinkveld, S., Benders, J., and Hilleband, B (2
dale » D. (2013) Stretching concepts: th .
peting pressures and decoupling in the evolution of breen de epts: the - of com
Studies, 34(1): 7-32. concepts, Organization
gps ir karpe Practice what you preach: how consultants frame
enac høne
985-97. Cd practice, Scandinavian Journal of Management, 28(4):
Hiebeler, R., Kelly, T.B., and Ketteman, C. (199
 &. (1998) Best Practices: Buildi | |
Arthur Andersens Global Best Practices, New York: Simon me me

Hislop, D., Bosua, R., and Helms, R (2018) Kn

| | KR owledge M | izations:

Critical Introduction, Oxford: Oxford alsa Pe . anagement in Organizations: A
, M.H.W,, Ghauri, P.N,, ae ;

Ho arret ns Larimo, JA, (2018) Institutional distance and knowledge
acqt 1onal buyer-supplier relationships: The moderating role of trust, Asia
Pacific Journal of Management, 35(2): 427-47.

Hocking, i Brown, M., and Harzing, A.W. (2007) Balancing global and local strategic
COMIERES: Expatriate knowledge transfer, applications, and learning within a transnational
organization, Human Resource Management, 46(4): 513-33.

Hofstede, G. (1980) Culture and organizations, International Studies of Management & Orga-
nization, 10(4): 15-41.

Hofstede, G. (1984) Cultures consequences: International Differences in Work-Related Values,
London: Sage.

Hofstede, G. (2001) Cultures Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions and
Organizations Across Nations, Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE publications.

Hofstede, G., Hofstede, G.J., and Minkov, M. (2010) Cultures and Organizations: Software of
the Mind, New York: McGraw-Hill.

Hofstede, G., Neuijen, B., Ohayv, D.D., and Sanders, G. (1990) Measuring organizational
cultures: Å qualitative and quantitative study across twenty cases, Administrative Science

Quarterly, 35(2): 286-316.
Holland, R. (2017) News translation, in C. Millån and F. Bartrina (eds.), The Routledge

Handbook of Translation Studies, Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 332-46.
Hollingshead, A.B. (1998) Communication, learning, and retrieval in transactive memory

systems, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 34(5): 423-42.
Holmes, J.M. (1972/1988) The name and nature of translation studies, in J.M. Holmes (ed.),
Translated! Papers on Literary Translations and Translation Studies, Amsterdam: Rodopi,

67-80.
Holz-Månttåri, J. (1984) Translatorisches Handeln. Theorie und Methode.”! Annales

Academiae Scientarum Fennicae, Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia.
Hong, J.F. and Nguyen, T.V. (2009) Knowledge embeddedness and the transfer mechanisms in

multinational corporations, Journal of World Business, 44(4): 347-56.
Honig, H.G. and Kuf3maul, P. (1982) Strategie der Ubersetzung: Ein Lehr-und Arbeitsbuch,

Tubingen: Giinter Narr Verlag.
Horvat, D., Dreher, C., and Som, O. (2019) How firms absorb external knowledge—Modelling

and managing the absorptive capacity process, International Journal of Innovation Manage-

ment, 23(1): 1950041.
House, J. (2006) Text and context in translation, Journal of Pragmatics, 38(3): 338-58.

Howells, J. (1996) Tacit knowledge, Technology Analysis and Strategic Management, 8(2):
91-106.


270 References
Howland, D. (2002) Translating the West: Language and Political Reason In Nineteenth-Century

ot Tetoweal ii Press.
Japan, Honolulu: University or? And (2007) Knowledge sharing behavior in vir.

T H., and Chang, C.M
Hsu, M.H,, Ju, T.L., Yen, C B on trust, self-efficacy; and outcome expectations,

«Computer Studies, 65(2): 153-69. |
International Journal of Human P lity of the firm’s advantages, California Manage.

Hu, Y.S. (1995) The international transferabi

ment Review, 37(4): 73-88. Å |
Huergo, E. and Jaumandreu, J. (2004) How does probability of innovation change with firm
» 193-207.

age? Small Business Economics, 22(3) | | |
Huggins, R., Johnston, A., and Thompson, P (2012) Network capital, social capital and knowl-
edge flow: how the nature of inter-organizational networks impacts on innovation. Industry
and Innovation, 19(3): 203-32. lation of
Hultin, L., Introna, L.D., and Måhring; M. (2021) The decentered tr ans ation of management
ideas: Attending to the conditioning flow of everyday work practices, Human Relations,
74(4): 587-620.
Hunt, W. and Downing, $. (1990) Mergers, acquisitions and human resource Journal of Human

Resource Management, 1(2): 195-210.
Hurtado Albir, A. (2015) The acquisition 0
assessment in translator training, Meta: Jo

256-80.
Hutzschenreuter, T., Kleindienst, I., and Lange, 5. (2016) The concept of distance in interna-

tional business research: A review and research agenda. International Journal of Manage-

ment Reviews, 18(2): 160-79.
Hwang H., and Suårez D. F. (2005) Lost and found in the translation of strategic plans and web-

sites, in B. Czarniawska and G. Sevön, (Eds.), Global ideas: How ideas, objects, and practices
travel in a global economy: 71-93. Malmö, Sweden: Liber & Copenhagen Business School

Press.
lansiti, M. (1998) Technology Integration, Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.

Iles, P., Wong, A.R., and Yolles, M. (2004) HRM and knowledge migration across cultures

issues, limitations and Mauritian specificities, Employee Relations, 26(6): 643-62.
Inggs, J.A. (2011) Censorship and translated children's literature in the Soviet Union: The

example of the Wizards Oz and Goodwin, Target. International Journal of Translation

Studies, 23(1): 77-91.
Ingram, P. and Baum, J. A. (1997) Chain affiliation and the failure of Manhattan hotels, 1898-

1980, Administrative Science Quarterly, 42(1): 68-102.
Inkpen, A.C. (2000) Learning through joint ventures: a framework of knowledge acquisition,

Journal of Management Studies, 37(7): 1019-44.
Inkpen, A.C. and Tsang, E.W. (2005) Social capital, networks, and knowledge transfer,

Academy of Management Review, 30(1): 146-65.

Inns, D. (2002) Metaphor in the literature of organizational analysis: A preliminary taxonomy
and a glimpse at a humanities-based perspective, Organization, 9(2): 305-30.

Isaac, G. (2011) Whose idea was this? Museums, replicas, and the reproduction of knowledge,
Current Anthropology, 52(2): 211-33.

Isaacson, W. (2011) Steve Jobs, New York: Simon & Schuster.

Isaksen, A. (2009) Innovation dynamics of global competitive regional clusters: The case of the
Norwegian centres of expertise, Regional Studies, 43(9): 1155-66.

Jackson, G., and Deeg, R. (2019) Comparing capitalisms and taking institutional context
seriously, Journal of International Business Studies, 50(1): 4-19.

Jacobsen, D. I. (2004) Organisasjonsendringer og endringsledelse (Organizational change and
change management), Bergen: Fagbokforlaget.

f translation competence. Competences, tasks, and
urnal des Traducteurs/Translators' Journal, 60(2):


References 271

Jacobsson, B. (1994) Reformer och organisatorisk identitet (Reforms and organizational

identity), in B. Jacobsson (ed.), Organisationsexperiment i kommuner och landsting (Orga-
nizational experiments in municipalities and counties), Stockholm: Nerenius & 6 t ;
Se Santerus:

Jansen, JJ, Van den Bosch, FA, and Volberda, H.W. (2005) Exploratory innovation, exploita-
tive innovation, and ambidexterity: The impact of environmental and organizational
antecedents, Schmalenbach Business Review, 57(4): 351-63.

Jasimuddin, S. M. and Zhang, Z.(2011),Transferring stored knowledge and storing transferred
knowledge, Information Systems Management, 28(1): 84-94,

Javidan, M., Stahl, G.K., Brodbeck, F., and Wilderom, C.P. (2005) Cross-border transfer of
knowledge: Cultural lessons from Project GLOBE, Academy of Management Perspectives,
1902): 59-76.

Jensen, R. and Szulanski, G. (2004) Stickiness and the adaptation of organizational practices in
cross-border knowledge transfers, Journal of International Business Studies, 35(6): 508-23.

Jensen, T., Sandström, J., and Helin, S. (2009) Corporate codes of ethics and the bending of
moral space, Organization, 16(4): 529-45,

Jiménez-Jiménez, D., and Sanz-Valle, R. (2005) Innovation and human resource management
fit: an empirical study, International Journal of Manpower, 26(4): 364-81.

Jorem, K. (1977) Menneskeverdig Personalpolitikk (A Human Personnel Policy), Oslo: Tanum.

Joullié, J. E., and Gould, A. M. (2022) Having nothing to say but saying it anyway: Lan-
guage and practical relevance in management research, Academy of Management Learning
e» Education, 21(2): 282-302.

Kaemper, E. (1727/2001) History of Japan/Heutiges Japan, Miinchen: Ludicium.

Kalberg, S. (1980) Max Weber's types of rationality: Cornerstones for the analysis of rational-
ization processes in history, American Journal of Sociology, 85(5): 1145-79.

Kantola, A. and Seeck, H. (2011) Dissemination of management into politics: Michael
Porter and the political uses of management consulting, Management Learning, 42(1):
25-47,

Karabag, S. F. and Berggren, C. (2017) Struggling with knowledge boundaries and Sticki-
ness; Case studies of innovationg firms in an emerging economy, in F. Tell, C. Berggren,
S. Brusoni, and A. Van De Ven (eds.), Managing Knowledge Integreation Across Boundaries,
139-154, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Karanikas, N., Khan, S.R., Baker, P.R., and Pilbeam, C. (2022) Designing safety interventions
for specific contexts: results from a literature review, Safety Science, 156. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ssci.2022.105906

Kasper, H., Miihlbacher, J., and Miiller, B. (2008) Intra-organizational knowledge sharing in
MNCs depending on the degree of decentralization and communities of practice, Journal

of Global Business & Technology, 4(1): 59-67. |
Katz, D. and Kahn, R.L. (1978) The Social Psychology of Organizations, New York: Wiley.
Kaul, A. (2013) Entrepreneurial action, unique assets, and appropriation risk: Firms as a means

of appropriating profit from capability creation, Organization Science, 24(6): 1765-81.
Kayes, A.B., Kayes, D.C., and Yamazaki, Y. (2005) Transferring knowledge across cultures: A

learning competencies approach, Performance Improvement Quarterly, 18(4): 87-100.
Kedia, B.L. and Bhagat, R.S. (1988) Cultural constraints on transfer of technology across
nations: Implications for research in international and comparative management, Academy

of Management Review, 13(4): 559-71. |
Kelemen, M. (2000) Too much or too little ambiguity: the language of total quality manage-

ment, Journal of Management Studies, 37: 483-98. Å |
Keller, W. (1996) Absorptive capacity: On the creation and acquisition of technology in

development, Journal of Development Economics, 49(1): 199-227,


972 References

> som

Kelly, L.G. (1979) The True interpreter: A History of Translation Theory and Practice in the West
elly, LAT

, Cel ea cele Routledge encyclopedia of translation studies, in M. Baker (ed)
enny, VU. å

. Routledge: 77-80.
| slation Studies, London:
Routledge Encyclopedia of ir ‘on between creativity and rules: the case of the performing
Kern, A. (2006) Exploring the relatio

‘zation, 36(1): 63-80.
| | ement & Organization, sabes .
my err pe ta då regaskis, O. (2019) omer os [ ransnationa|
— ie The Role of Globalizing Actors, in A. Sturdy, S. Heusinkveld, T. Reay, and D
g '

Strang (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Management Ideas, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

177-94. ing by analogy and the
fe elissen, J. (2017) Reasoning DY Progress
Ketokivi, M., Mantere, S., and Corn 424): 637-58.

Academy of Management Review, | |
senien, 8 11998 Hd p dom Better? Delayering the Management Hierarchy, Brighton, Uk:

Institute for Employment Studies.
Keuning, D. and Opheij, W. (1994) Delayering

Create a Flexible and Responsive Organization, |
Khalil, O. and Marouf, L. (2017) Å cultural interpretatio

economy, Journal of the Knowledge Economy; 8(1): 97-126. | |
Kieser, A. (2002) On communication barriers between management science, consultancies

and business companies, in I. Clark and R. Fincham (eds.), Critical Consulting: New

Perspectives on the Management Advice Industry, Oxford: Blackwell: 206-27, |
Kieser, A. (2011) Between rigour and relevance: Co-existing institutional logics in the field of

management science, Society and Economy, 33(2): 237-47. |
Kieser, A. and Leiner, L. (2009) Why the rigour-relevance gap In management research is

unbridgeable, Journal of Management Studies, 46(3): 516-33.
Kieser, A., Nicolai, A., and Seidl, D. (2015) The practical relevance of management research:

Turning the debate on relevance into a rigorous scientific research program, The Academy
of Management Annals, 9: 143-233.

Kikoski, C.K. and Kikoski, J.F. (2004) The inquiring organization: Tacit knowledge, conversa-
tion, and knowledge creation: Skills for 21st-century organizations, Westport, CT: Greenwood

Publishing Group.
Kilduff, M. and Brass, D.J. (2010) Organizational social network research: Core ideas and key

debates, Academy of Management Annals, 4(1): 317-57.
Kilduff, M., and Tsai, W. (2003) Social Networks and Organizations, London: Sage Press.

Kim, M. (2013) Many roads lead to Rome: Implications of geographic scope as a source of
isolating mechanisms, Journal of International Business Studies, 44(9): 898-921.

Kim, S. and Anand, J. (2018) Knowledge complexity and the performance of inter-unit
knowledge replication structures, Strategic Management Journal, 39(7): 1959-89.

Kirkpatrick, I., Bullinger, B. Lega, F. and Dent, M. (2013) The translation of hospital manage-
ment models in European health systems: a framework for comparison, British Journal of
Management, 24: 548-61.

Kittel, H. and Poltermann, A. (1998) German tradition, in M. Baker (ed.), Routledge Encyclo-
pedia of Translation Studies, London: Routledge: 418-26.

Klaudy, K. (1998) Explicitation, in M. Baker (ed.), The Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation
Studies, London and New York: Routledge: 80-4.

Klausen, A.M. (1968) Kerala Fishermen and the Indo-Norwegian Pilot Project, Oslo: Univer-
sitetsforlaget.
Knill, C., Christoph, K., and Føllésdal, A. (2001) The Europeanisation of National Administra-

tions: Patterns of Institutional Change and Persistence, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Organizations: How to Beat Bureaucracy and
London: Financial Times/Pitman.

n of nations’ readiness for knowledge


References 273

Know, K. W. W. (2001) Supporting knowled
Organizational Dynamics, 30(2): 100-20,

Koch, $. and Deetz, S. (1981) Metaphor analysis f soci hans å EE
Applied Communication Research, 9(1): ms Of Social reality in organizations, Journal of

ingh, H. (1988) Th |
Kogut, B. and Singh, € effect of national !
Journal of International Business Studies, 1903): 41 1432, Ture on the choice of ses er

Kogut, B. and Zander, U. (1992) Knowledge of the firm, Der ne
replication of technology, Organization Science, 3(3): må capabilities, and the

Kogut, B. and Zander, U. (1993) Knowledge
ory of the multinational corporation,

625-45.

Kohtamåki, M., Heimonen, J., and Parida, V. (2019) The nonlinear relationship between

entrepreneurial orientation and sales growth: The moderating effects of slack resources and
absorptive capacity, Journal of Business Research, 100: 100-10

Koller, W. (1989) Equivalence in translation theory, in A. Chesterman (ed.), Readings in
Translation Theory, Helsinki: Oy Finn Lectura: 99-104,

Konlechner, S., and Ambrosini, V. (2019) Issues and Trends in
Review and Assessment, Journal of Management, 45(6): 2352-86.

Korneliussen, T. and Pedersen, P.A. (2001) Quality assessment in international industrial

markets: The case of Norwegian stockfish, Paper presented at the 17th Annual Industrial
Marketing and Purchasing Conference, Oslo, 98-11 September 2001.

Korneliussen, T and Panozzo, F. (2005) From “nature” to “economy” and “culture”; How
stockfish travels and constructs an action net. In B. Czarniawska and G. Sevén (Eds.) Global

ideas. How ideas, objects and practices travel in the global economy, Liber and Copenhagen
Business School Press, Malmö, 106-125

Koskinen, K. (1994) Translating the Untranslatable: The Impact of Deconstruction and Post-
structuralism on Translation Theory, Translators’ Journal, 39(3): 446-52.

Kostopoulos, K., Papalexandris, A., Papachroni, M., and Ioannou, G. (2011) Absorptive
capacity, innovation, and financial performance, Journal of Business Research, 64(12):
1335-43.

Kostova, T. (1997) Country institutional profiles: Concept and measurement, Academy of
Management Best Paper Proceedings, 24: 64-81.

Kostova, T. (1999) Transnational transfer of strategic organizational practices: A contextual
perspective, Academy of Management Review, 24(2): 308-24.

Kostova, T., Beugelsdijk, S., Scott, W.R., Kunst, V.E., Chua, C.H., and van Essen, M. (2020) The
construct of institutional distance through the lens of different institutional perspectives:
Review, analysis, and recommendations, Journal of International Business Studies, 51(4):
467-97,

Kostova, T. and Roth, K. (2002) Adoption of an organizational practice by subsidiaries of
multinational corporations: Institutional and relational effects, Academy of Management
Journal, 45(1): 215-33.

Krejsler, J.B. (2013) What works in education and social welfare? A mapping of the evidence
discourse and reflections upon consequences for professionals, Scandinavian Journal of
Educational Research, 57(1): 16-32.

Krings, H. (1986) Translation problems and translation strategies of advanced German learn-
ers of French, in J. House and S. Blum-Kulka (eds.), Interlingual and Intercultural Commu-
nication: Discourse and Cognition in Translation and Second Language Acquisition studies,

Tubingen, G. Narr: 263-76. | | |
Kroc, R. and Anderson, R. (1987) Grinding It Out: The Making of McDonalds, New York:

Macmillan.

86 creation and sharing in social networks,

of the firm and the evolutionary the-
Journal of International Business Studies, 24(4):


274 References

Kroll, J.F. and Stewart, E. (1994) Category interference in translation and picture naming: Evi.
dence for asymmetric connections between bilingual memory representations, Journal of

Memory and Language, 33(2): 149-74. pe
Kuhlmann, S. (2001) Future governance of innovation policy in Europe—three Scenarios,

Research Policy, 30(6): 953-76. | |

Kuhlmann, $, and Wollmann, H. (2019) Introduction to comparative public administration:
Administrative systems and reforms in Europe, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing

Kuhn, T.S. (1970) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

Kumar, J.A. and Ganesh, L.S. (2009) Research on knowledge transfer in organizations: 4
morphology, Journal of Knowledge Management, 13(4): 161-74. )

Kummen, A. (2008) Hva mener medarbeidere og ledere om medarbeidersamtaler? En SWOT.
analyse (Employees’ and leaders’ opinions about Development Dialogue, A SWOT analysis),
Master’s thesis, April 2008, Department of Psychology, The University of Oslo,

Kunkel, J.H. and Berry, L.L. (1968) A behavioral conception of retail image, Journal of
Marketing, 32(4): 21-27.

Kwon, S.W, Rondi, E., Levin, D.Z., De Massis, A., and Brass, D.J. (2020) Network bro-
kerage: An integrative review and future research agenda, Journal of Management, 46(6);
1092-120.

Lado, A.A. and Zhang, M.J. (1998) Expert systems, knowledge development and utilization,
and sustained competitive advantage: A resource-based model. Journal of Management,
24(4): 489-509.

Lægreid, P. and Rykkja, L. H. (2015) Hybrid Collaborative Arrangements: The welfare admin-
istration in Norway-between hierarchy and network, Public Management Review, 17(7):
960-80.

Lægreid, P. and Rykkja, L.H. (2022) Accountability and inter-organizational collaboration
within the state, Public Management Review, 24(5):683-703.

Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1980) The metaphorical structure of the human conceptual
system, Cognitive Science, 4(2): 195-208.

Lam, A. (2000) Tacit knowledge, organizational learning and societal institutions: An inte-
grated framework. Organization Studies, 21(3): 487-513.

Lam, P. (1995) Copyright protection of foreign computer software in the People’s Republic of
China: significant progress in two years, Loyola of Los Angeles International and Comparative
Law Journal, 17(4): 861-90,

Lambert, J. (2017) Prelude: The institutionalization of the Discipline, in C. Millan and E
Bartina (eds.), The Routledge Handbook of Translation Studies, Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge:
7-28.

Lambert, W.G. (2013) Babylonian Creation Myths, Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns.

Lane, P.J., Koka, B.R., and Pathak, S. (2006) The reification of absorptive capacity: A critical
review and rejuvenation of the construct, Academy of Management Review, 31(4): 833-63.

Lane, PJ. and Lubatkin, M. (1998) Relative absorptive capacity and interorganizational
learning, Strategic Management Journal, 19(5): 461-77.

Lane, P.J., Salk, J.E., and Lyles, M.A. (2001) Absorptive capacity, learning, and performance in
international joint ventures, Strategic Management Journal, 22(12): 1139-61.

Langen, P.D. (2002) Clustering and performance: the case of maritime clustering in The
Netherlands, Maritime Policy & Management, 29(3): 209-21,

Langrogne, M. (1919) Taylorism in the Mine: Efficiency Methods below Ground, Colliery
Guardian, 28 November, pp. 429-30, 12 December, p. 1574, and 24 December, p. 1714.

Larsson, I. (2019) Att översåtta Lean till praktik i hålso-och sjukvården (trans: To translate
Lean into practice in the health-care sector), Doctoral dissertation, Uppsala University:
Företagsekonomiska institutionen, ISBN: 978-91-506-2776-3.


References 275

t atour; B. (1983), Give me a laboratory and I will rais |
Mulkay (Eds.), Science Observed, Sage Ridden wuaker ce å perma

Latour; B. (1986) The powers of associations, in J. Law (ed |
Sociology of Knowledge? London: Routledge and Keo men Å jens agree sia
Latour, B. (1987) Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists | |
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legiti | ve
bridge: Cambridge University Press. g: Legitimate Peripheral Participation, Cam-

Lawrence, P.R. and Lorsch, J.W. (1967) Differentiatio | !
ape n and
tions, Administrative Science Quarterly 12: 1-47, nd integration in complex organiza-

Lawrence, I. på at as GER perp ee translation: Establishing North America’ first
government-sanctioned supervised injection site, Academ :
hegre y of Management Journal, 60(5):

Lawson, B., Samson, D., and Roden, S. (2012) Appropriating the value from innovation:
inimitability and the effectiveness of isolating mechanisms, R&D Management, 42(5):
420-34. ei?

Lazarova, M. and Tarique, I. (2005) Knowledge transfer upon repatriati

atriation, |
Business, 40(4): 361-73. Å J nl aig

Lederer, M. (1994/2003) La traduction aujourd’hui: Le modéle interprétatif (N. Larché as
Translation: The interpretive model), Paris: Hachette, Manchester: St Jerome.

Lee, C., Lee, K., and Pennings, J.M. (2001) Internal capabilities, external networks, and per-
formance: a study on technology-based ventures, Strategic Management Journal, 22(6-7):
615-40.

Lee, H. and Choi, B. (2003) Knowledge management enablers, processes, and organiza-
tional performance: An integrative view and empirical examination, Journal of Management

Information Systems, 20(1): 179-228.
Lefevere, A. (1992) Translating literature: Practice and Theory in a Comparative Literature

Context, New York: Modern Language Association of America.
Lefevere, A. and Bassnett, S. (1990) Introduction: Proust’s Grandmother and the Thousand

and One nights: The Cultural Turn in Translation Studies, in S. Bassnett and A. Lefevere

(eds.), Translation, History and Culture, London: Pinter: 1-13.
Leishman, D. (1990) An annotated bibliography of works on analogy, International Journal of

Intelligent Systems, 5(1): 43-82.
Leonard, D. and Sensiper, S. (1998) The role of tacit knowledge in group innovation, California

Management Review, 40(3): 112-32.
Leonard-Barton, D. and Deschamps, I. (1988) Managerial i

new technology, Management Science, 34(10): 1252-65.
Lervik, J.E. and Lunnan, R. (2004) Contrasting perspectives on the diffusion of manage-

ment knowledge: Performance management in å Norwegian multinational, Management

Learning, 35(3): 287-302.
Letmathe, P., Schweitzer, M., and Zielinski,
performance effects of knowledge transfer an

Management, 30(3): 221-36. hå
Levin, D.Z. and Cross, R. (2004) The strength of weak ties you can trust: The mediating role

of trust in effective knowledge transfer. Management Science, 50( 11): 1477-90. |
Levina, N. and Vaast, E. (2005) The emergence of boundary spanning competence In prac-
tice: implications for implementation and use of information systems, MIS Quarterly, 29(2):

335-63. |
Levitt, B. and March, J.G. (1988) Organizational learning, Annual Review of Sociology, 14(1):

319-38,

and Engineers Through Society,

nfluence in the implementation of

M. (2012) How to learn new tasks: Shop floor
d performance feedback Journal of Operations


276 References

Harvard Business Review, 44(5): 63-70.

Levitt, T. (1966) Innovative imitation,
) Microfoundations of internal and externa|

Lewin, A. Y., Massini, S., and Peeters, C. (2011

absorptive capacity routines, Organization Science, 22( 1): 81-78,
Leydesdorff, L. (2021) The Evolutionary Dynamics of Discursive Knowledge: Communication.

Theoretical Perspectives on an Empirical Philosophy of Science, Amsterdam: Springer Nature.

247, 5 fis
ct of knowledge stickiness on knowledge transfer

Li, C.Y. and Hsieh, C.T, (2009) The impa = |
implementation, internalization, and satisfaction for multinational corporations, Internq.

tional Journal of Information Management, 29(6): 425-35. |
Li, J. (2015) Towards a Happier Society? Subjective Well-being and the Happiness Index of

Guangdong, China, Doctoral thesis, University of Birmingham, UK. | |
Li, M. and Gao, F. (2003) Why Nonaka highlights tacit knowledge: a critical review, Journal of

Knowledge Management, 7(4): 6-14.
Liao, J., Welsch, H., and Stoica, M. (2003) Organizational a
ness: An empirical investigation of growth-oriented SMEs,

practice, 28(1): 63-86.
Lichtenthaler, U. (2009) Absorptive capacity, environmental turbulence, and the comple-

mentarity of organizational learning processes, Academy of Management Journal, 52(4);

822-46.
Lidin, O.G. (2002) Tanegashima: The Arrival of Europe in Japan, Copenhagen: NIAS Press,

Lillis, A.M. and Mundy, J. (2005) Cross-sectional field studies in management account-
ing research—closing the gaps between surveys and case studies, Journal of Management

Accounting Research, 17(1): 119-41.
Lillrank, P. (1995) The transfer of management innovations from Japan, Organization Studies,

16(6) 971-89.
Lin, B.W. (2003) Technology transfer as technological learning: a source of competitive

advantage for firms with limited R&D resources, Reé&D Management, 33(3): 327-41.
Lippman, S.A., and Rumelt, R.P. (1982) Uncertain imitability: An analysis of interfirm differ-
ences in efficiency under competition, The Bell Journal of Economics, 13(2): 418-38.

Littler, C.R., Wiesner, R., and Dunford, R. (2003) The dynamics of delayering: Changing
management structures in three countries, Journal of Management Studies, 40(2): 225-56,

Lofgren, O. (2005) Cultural alchemy: Translating the experience economy into Scandinavian,
in B. Czarniawska and G. Sevön (eds.), Global Ideas. How Ideas, Objects and Practices Travel

in the Global economy, Malmø: Liber & Copenhagen Business School Press: 15-29,

Long, L. (2017) The translation of sacred texts, in C. Millan and F. Bartrina (eds.), The Routledge
Handbook of Translation Studies, Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge: 464-74.

Lonsdale, A.B. (1998) Direction of translation, in M. Baker (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of

Translation Studies, London: Routledge: 63-67.
Lörscher, W. (1991) Translation Performance, Translation Process, and Translation Strategies:

A Psycholinguistic Investigation, Tubingen, Gunter Narr.
Lörscher, W. (1993) Translation process analysis, in Y. Gambier and J. Tommola (eds.),

Translation and Knowledge, Finland: University of Turku: 195-212.
Lérscher, W. (2012) Bilingualism and translation competence, SYNAPS—A Journal of Profes-

sional Communication, 27: 3-15.
Love, E.G. and Cebon, P. (2008) Meanings on multiple levels: the influence of field-level

and organization-level meaning systems on diffusion, Journal of Management Studies, 45:

239-67
Love, J.F. and Miller, A.W. (1995) McDonald's: Behind the Arches, New York: Bantam Books.

Lucas, L.M. (2006) The role of culture on knowledge transfer: the case of the multinational
corporation, The Learning Organization, 13(3): 257-75.

bsorptive capacity and responsive.
Entrepreneurship Theory and


References 277

Lucken, M. (2016) Imitation and Creativity in Japa ome, |
Hayao, New York: Columbia Unveieltr Drees nese Arts: From Kishida Ryusei to Miyazaki

Lundvall, B.A. (1988) Innovation as an interactive pr
ocess: f å
to national systems of innovation, in G. Dosi, C. reder re G Siiverber i
and L. Soete (eds.), Technical change and economic theory, London: Pint Publish i
349-69 ) . e ubolsner:
sorry ti and Te S. (2005) Science, technology and innovation policy, in J. Fagerberg
D.C. ree ee elson (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Innovation, Oxford: Oxford
University Press: 599-631, |
Lunenburg, F.C. (2010) Communication: |
id toll, on: The process, barriers, and improving effectiveness,
pre come Social care: rhetoric and reality, in H.T.O. Davies, S.M. Nutley, and P.C
Smith (eds.), at Works? Evidence-based Policy and P ice in Public ih
t 1 ‘ °
Policy Press: 117-40. y ractice in Public Services, Bristol:
Macnamara, J. (1967) The bilingual's linguistic performance i i
—a hol -
nal of Social Issues, 23(2): 58-77. pe
Madeley, C. (2007) Copying cars: forgotten licensing agreements, in R. Cox (ed.), The Culture
of Copying in Japan, Critical and Historical Perspectives, New York: Routledge: 251-68.
Madsen, D.@. (2014) Interpretation and use of the Balanced Scorecard in Denmark: Evidence
from suppliers and users of the concept, Danish Journal of Management & Business, 78(3/4):

13-25.
Madsen, D. @. and Slatten, K. (2022) The Diffusion of Human Resource Transformation in

Scandinavia: A Supply-Side Perspective, Societies, 12(3): 2-18.
Madsen, D.@., Slatten, K., and Johanson, D. (2017) The emergence and evolution of bench-
marking: A management fashion perspective, Benchmarking: An International Journal,

24(3): 775-805.
Majchrzak, A., More, P.H., and Faraj, S. (2012) Transcending knowledge differences in cross-

functional teams, Organization Science, 23(4): 951-70.
Maleszka, M. (2019) Application of collective knowledge diffusion in a social network envi-

ronment, Enterprise Information Systems, 13(7-8): 1120-42.
Malik, T.H. (2013) National institutional differences and cross-border university-industry

knowledge transfer, Research Policy, 42(3): 776-87.
Malmkjær, K. (2013). Where are we? (From Holmes’ map until now). In C. Millan and

E. Bartrina (Eds.), The Routledge Handbook of Translation Studies, London: Routledge

: 31-44,
Malmkjær, K. (ed.) (1998) Translation and Language Teaching, Language Teaching and Trans-

lation, Manchester: St Jerome Publications.
Mansfield, E. (1985) How rapidly does new industrial technology leak out? The Journal of

Industrial Economics: 34(2): 217-23.
Mansfield, E., and Romeo, A. (1980) Technology transfer to overseas subsidiaries by US-based

firms, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 95(4): 737-50.
March, J.G. (1976) The technology of foolishness, in J.G. March and J.P. Olsen (eds.), Ambiguity

and Choice in Organizations, Oslo: Universitetsforlaget: 69-81.
March, J.G. and Olsen, J.P. (1989) Rediscovering Institutions—The Organizational Basis of

Politics, New York: The Free Press.
March, J.G. and Olsen, J.P. (1995) Democratic Governance, New York: Free Press.

March, J.G. and Simon H.A. (1958) Organizations, New York: Wiley.
Marchiori, D. and Franco, M. (2020) Knowledge transfer in the context of inter-

networks: Foundations and intellectual structures,
130-39,

organizational

Journal of Innovation & Knowledge, 5(2):


278 References

dge transfer capacity and its implications for the

7 wle |
Martin, X. and Salomon, R. (2003) Ene Journal of International Business Studies, 34(4).

theory of the multinational corporation,

356-73. | f absorptive capacity th
| ig, KJ. (2016) The emergence of absorp pacity through
Martinkenaite, I. and Breunig, KJ. ( Business Research, 69(2): 700-08.

micro-macro level interactions, Journal of | | |
Maseland R.. Dow, D., and Steel, P. (2018). The Kogut and Singh national cultural distance
dan dr her than a crutch, Journal of Internationa

index: Time to start using it as a springboard rat

Business Studies, 49(9): 1154-66. | |
Massey, D. and Wield, D. (2003) High-tech Fantasies: Science

London: Routledge.
Mavor, S. (1924) Problems of Mechanical Co

McAuly, L., Russell, G., and Sims, J. (1997

Management Accounting, 75(11): 36-37. |
McDermott, R., and O’Dell, C. (2001) Overcoming cultur

Journal of Knowledge Management, 5(1): 76-85.
McDonald, C.J. (1998) The evolution of Intel’s Copy EXACTLY!—technology transfer method,

Intel Technology Journal, 4(1): 1-6. ged
McDonough III, E.F. (2000) Investigation of factors contributing to the success of cross-

functional teams. Journal of Product Innovation Management: An International Publication

of the Product Development & Management Association, 17(3): 221-35. |
McEvily, B., Soda, G., and Tortoriello, M. (2014) More formally: Rediscovering the missing

link between formal organization and informal social structure, Academy of Management

Annals, 8(1): 299-345.
McEvily, S.K. and Chakravarthy, B. (2002) The persistence of knowledge-based advantage: an

empirical test for product performance and technological knowledge, Strategic Management

Journal, 23(4): 285-305.
McEvily, S.K., Das, S., and McCabe, K. (2000) Avoiding competence substitution through

knowledge sharing, Academy of Management Review, 25(2): 294-311.
McEvoy, G.M. and Buller, P.F. (2013) Research for practice: The management of expatriates,

Thunderbird International Business Review, 55(2): 213-26.
McGrath, J.E. and Argote, L. (2001) Group processes in organizational contexts, in M.A.

McPhee, R.D. and Poole, M.S. (2001) Organizational structures and configurations, in EM.
Jablin and L.L. Putnam (eds.), The New Handbook of Organizational Communication:
Advances in Theory, Research, and Methods, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage: 503-43

Melloan, G, (1988) An American views Japans copycat culture, The Wall Street Journal, July
12: pp. 29.

Mennicken, A. (2008) Connecting worlds: the translation of international auditing stan-
dards into post-Soviet audit practices, Accounting Organizations & Society, 33(4-5):
384-414,

Meschi, P.X. and Métais, E. (2015) Too big to learn: The effects of major acquisition failures on
subsequent acquisition divestment, British Journal of Management, 26(3): 408-23.

Meyer, J.W., Boli, J., Thomas, G.M., and Ramirez, RO. (1997) World Society and the Nation
State, American Journal of Sociology, 103: 144-81.

Meyer, J.W and Rowan, B. (1977) Institutionalized organizations: Formal structure as myth
and ceremony, American Journal of Sociology, 83 (2): 340-63.

Meyer, R.E. and Höllerer, M.A. (2010) Meaning structures in a contested issue field: a topo-
graphic map of shareholder value in Austria, Academy of Management Journal, 53(6):
1241-62.

Michelotta, E.R. and Washington, M. (2013) Institutions and maintenance: the repair work of
Italian professions, Organization Studies, 34(8): 1137-70.

Parks in Society, Science and Space,

al Mining, Collier Guardian, 20 June, 1924.
) Tacit knowledge for competitive advantage,

al barriers to sharing knowledge,


References 279

Miles, R.E., and Snow, C.C. (197 pt hen Ge
McGraw-Hill. (1978) Organization Strategy, Structure, and Process, New York:

Millan, C. and Bartrina, F. (2013) Introduction. ; |
» In GC. Millan and F, Bartri
Routledge Handbook of Translation Studies, London: Routledge: 1-6 tast

ilton, N. (2007) Knowled sition i |
vi sr (2007) edge Acquisition in Practice: A Step-by-Step Guide, London: Springer-
værer å " lary absorptive capacity and HRM, Journal of International Business Studies,

Minbaeva, D.B. (2007) Knowledge transfer in multinat |
tinational å
national Review, 47(4): 567-93, 10nal corporations, Management Inter
Mintzberg, H. (1979) The Str ucturing of Organizations, Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.

= H, (1993) Structure in fives: Designing Effective Organizations, New Jersey: Prentice-

Mishra, A.K. and Mishra, K.E. (2013) The research on trust in leadership: The need for context.
Journal of Trust Research, 3(1): 59-69.

Mitchell, J.H. (1933) The Worker’s Point of View. XIII. The Mechanization of the Miner,
Human Factor, 7: 139-50.

Mohamed, M., Stankosky, M., and Murray, A. (2004) Applying knowledge management prin-
ciples to enhance cross-functional team performance, Journal of Knowledge Management,
8(3): 127-42.

Monstadt, J. and Schramm, S. (2017) Toward the networked city? Translating technological
ideals and planning models in water and sanitation systems in Dar es Salaam, International
Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 41(1): 104-25.

Moore, M.D. (2016) Durkheim's types of suicide and social capital: a cross-national compari-
son of 53 countries, International Social Science Journal, 66(219-220): 151-61.

Moreland, R.L., Argote, L., and Krishnan, R. (1996) Socially shared cognition at work: Trans-
active memory and group performance, in J. L. Nye and A. M. Brower (eds.), What’ So
Social About Social Cognition? Social Cognition Research in Small Groups, Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage: 57-84.

Morgan, G. (1980) Paradigms, metaphors, and puzzle solving in organization theory, Admin-
istrative Science Quarterly, 25(4): 605-22.

Morgan, G. (1986) Images of Organization, Beverly Hills, CA: SAGE Publications.

Morgan, G. (1989) Creative Organization Theory: A Resourcebook, Newbury Park, London:

Sage.
Morris, T. and Lancaster, Z. (2006) Translating management ideas, Organization Studies, 27(2):

207-33.
Morris-Suzuki, T. (1994) The Technological Transformation of Japan: From the Seventeenth to

the Twenty-first Century, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mortensen, N.M. (2020) The challenges of translating and implementing co-production in
care services—A Danish case study, Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Aalborg University.

Mosakowski, E. (1997) Strategy making under causal ambiguity: Conceptual issues and

empirical evidence, Organization Science, 8(4): 414-42.
Mowat, C.L. (1963) Britain Between the Wars: 1918-1940, Abingdon, Oxon: Taylor & Francis.

Mowery, D.C., Oxley, J.E., and Silverman, B.S. (1996) Strategic alliances and interfirm knowl-

edge transfer, Strategic Management Journal, 17(S2): 77-91.
Mueller, F. and Whittle, A. (2011) Translating management ideas: a discursive devices analysis,

Organization Studies, 32(2): 187-210.
Mukhtarov, F. (2014) Rethinking the travel of ideas: policy translation in the water sector,

Policy & Politics, 42(1): 71-88.


280 References

Munday, J. (2013) Introducing Translation Studies: Theories and Applications, London: Rout.

Muniz Jr, J., Wintersberger, D.s and Hong; J. L. (2022) Worker and at judgments about
factors that facilitate knowledge-sharing: Insights from a Brazilian automotive assembly

- 132-146.
line, Knowledge and Process Management, 29(2): Ae |
Murphy, G.L. ( an On metaphoric representation, Cognition, me , pen
Mustapha, H. (1998) Qur'an (Koran) translation, in M. Baker (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of

Translation Studies, London: Routledge: 200-4.

’s Library.
Nabokov, V. (1955/1992) Lolita, London: Everymans | |
Nahapiet J. ee Ghoshal, S. (1998) Social capital, intellectual capital, and the organizationa|

advantage. Academy of Management Review, 23(2): 242-66. a |
Naqshbandi, M. M., and Kamel, Y. (2017) Intervening role of realized absorptive capacity in

organizational culture-open innovation relationship: Evidence from an emerging market,

ement, 42(3): 5-20.
Journal of General Manag: MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.

Neef, D. (1997) The Knowledge Economy, Boston,
eef, D. (1997) g L., Lander, R., and Olin, A. (2022) Middle lead.

Nehez, J., Blossing, U., Gyllander Torkildsen, |
ers translating knowledge about improvement: Making change in the school and preschoo|

organisation, Journal of Educational Change, 23(3): 315-41.
Nelson, D. (1974) Scientific management, systematic management, and labor, 1880-1915, The

Business History Review, 48(4): 479-500. |
Nelson, R., and Winter, S. (1982) An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change, Cambridge,

MA: Belknap Press. | |
Neubert, A. (2000) Competence in language, in languages, and in translation, Benjamins

Translation Library, in C. Schaffner and B. Adab (eds.), Developing Translation Competence,

Amsterdam: John Benjamins: 3-18.
Nicolai, A. and Seidl, D. (2010) That’s relevant! Different forms of practical relevance ip

management science, Organization Studies, 31(9-10): 1257-85.
Nicolini, D. (2010) Medical innovation as a process of translation: Å case from the field of

telemedicine, British Journal of Management, 21(4): 1011-26.
Nicolini, D., Lippi, A., and Monteiro, P. (2019) Systematic Heterogeneity in the Adapta-

tion Process of Management Innovations, in T. Reay, A. Langley, and H. Tsoukas (eds.),
Institutions and Organizations: A Process View, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 194-226,

Nida, E. A. (1964) Toward a Science of Translating: With Special Reference to Principles and

Procedures Involved in Bible Translating, Leiden: E.J. Brill Archive.
Nielsen, J. A., Mathiassen, L., and Newell, $. (2022) Multidirectional idea travelling across an

organizational field, Organization Studies, 43(6): 931-52.

Nielsen, J.A., Wæraas, A., and Dahl, K. (2020) When management concepts enter the public
sector: a dual-level translation perspective, Public Management Review, 22(2): 234-54,

Nieves, J. and Osorio, J. (2013) The role of social networks in knowledge creation, Knowledge
Management Research & Practice, 11(1): 62-77.

Nilsen, E. A. and Sandaunet, A. G. (2020) Implementing new practice: The roles of translation,
progression and reflection, Journal of Change Management, 21(3): 307-32.

Nohria, N., Eccles, R.G., and Press, H.B. (1992) Networks and Organizations: Structure, Form,
and Action, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Nonaka, I., Byosiere, P., Borucki, C.C., and Konno, N. (1994) Organizational knowledge
creation theory: a first comprehensive test, International Business Review, 3(4): 337-51.
Nonaka, I. and Reinmoeller, P. (2002) Knowledge Creation and Utilization: Promoting
Dynamic Systems of Creative Routines, in M.A. Hitt, R. Amit, C.E. Lucier, and R.D.
Nixon (eds.), Creating Value: Winners in the New Business Environment, Oxford: Blackwell,

104-27,

ledge.


References 281

Nonaka, I. and Takeuchi, A. (1995) The Knowledge-Creating Company: How Japanese Compa-
nies Create the Dynamics of Innovation, Oxford UK: Oxford University Press

Nonaka, L, Von Krogh, G., and Voelpel, S. (2006) Organizational knowledge creation theory:
Evolutionary paths and future advances, Organization Studies, 27(8): 1179-208.

Norman, P.M. (2002) Protecting knowledge in strategic alliances: Resource and relational

characteristics, The Journal of High Technology Management Research, 13(2): 177-202.

North, D.C. (1990) Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Novak, J.D. and Gowin, D.B. (1984) Learning How to Learn, New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Novak, W.L. (1986) Iacocca: An Autobiography, New York: Bantam Books.

Nygard, E.R. and Ingebrigtsen, KS. (2019) Torrfiskmarkedet i Italia-et tradisjonelt marked i
endring. En studie av tørrfiskhandelen mellom Norge og Italia: relasjoner, verdi og posisjoner-
ing (The Italian stockfish market—a traditional market in change. A study of the stockfish

trade between Norway and Italy: relationships, values and positioning), Bodø: Master's
thesis, Nord Universitet.

O'Dell, C. and Grayson, C. J. (1998) If only we knew what we know: Identification and transfer
of internal best practices, California Management Review, 40(3): 154-74.

O'Loughlin, J., Ward, M.D., Lofdahl, C.L., Cohen, J.S., Brown, D.S., Reilly, D., and Shin,
M. (1998) The diffusion of democracy, 1946-1994, Annals of the Association of American
Geographers, 88(4): 545-74.

O'Shea, J.E. and Madigan, C. (1997) Dangerous Company: The Consulting Powerhouses and the
Businesses They Save and Ruin, New York: Times Business.

O'Sullivan, E. (2017) Childrens literature and translation studies, in C. Millån and F. Bartrina
(eds.), The Routledge Handbook of Translation Studies, Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge: 451-62.

Oakley, A., Gough, D., Oliver, S., and Thomas, J. (2005) The politics of evidence and method-
ology: lessons from the EPPI-Centre, Evidence & Policy: A Journal of Research, Debate and
Practice, 1(1): 5-32.

Ober, J. (2008) Democracy and knowledge: Innovation and Learning in Classical Athens,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Oddou, G., Szkudlarek, B., Osland, J.S., Deller, J., Blakeney, R., and Furuya, N. (2013)
Repatriates as a Source of Competitive Advantage: How to manage knowledge transfer,
Organizational Dynamics, 42(4): 257-66.

Ojo, O. (2009) Impact assessment of corporate culture on employee job performance, Business

Intelligence Journal, 2(2): 388-97.
Okafor, E. and Osuagwu, C.H. (2006) The Underlying Issues in Knowledge Elicitation, Journal

of Information, Knowledge, and Management, 1: 96-108.

Olie, R. (1994) Shades of culture and institutions-in international mergers, Organization
Studies, 15(3): 381-405.

Olivera, F. (2000) Memory systems in organizations: an empirical investigation of mecha-
nisms for knowledge collection, storage and access, Journal of Management Studies, 37(6):

811-32,
Olohan, M. (2017) Scientific and technical translation, in C. Millan and F. Bartrina (eds.), The

Routledge Handbook of Translation Studies, Abingdon, Oxon; Routledge, 425-37,

Olsen, J.P. (2002) The many faces of Europeanization, JCMS: Journal of Common Market
Studies, 40(5): 921-52.

Olsen, J.P. (2010) Governing through institution building: institutional theory and recent Euro-

pean experiments in democratic organization, Oxford: Oxford University Press. al:
Ordanini, A., Rubera, G., and DeFillippi, R. (2008) The many moods of inter-organizational
imitation: A critical review, International Journal of Management Reviews, 10(4): 375-98.


282 References

las, F. (2021) Intra-organizational social capital a,

| | , and Guadamil | | , )
Ortiz, B., Donate, M.J. å le of realized absorptive capacity, Frontiers in Psycho}.

product innovation: the mediating ro

cricket .aitarity, Psychological Review, 86(3): 161-80,
tony, A. (1979a) Beyond literal similarity, ray |
i A dt the role of similarity in similes and ae ag Ortony (
M | ho d Thought, Cambridge: Cambridge University tress:
etaphor an git, ance: A suitable case for treatment? in S, Osborne

Osborne, S. (2010) The (new) public govern | or!
(ed.), The New Public Governance, Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge: 1-16.

Ostroff, E (1999) The horizontal organization: What the emery lon of the f uture actually looks
like and how it delivers value to customers, New Yor k: Oxfor University Press, |
Ostrom, E. (1990) Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action,

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Oswick, C., Fleming, P., and Hanlon, G. ( OL)
the processes of organizational theory building;

318-37.
Oswick, C., Keenoy, T., and Grant, D. (2001

ed.)

2011) From borrowing to blending: Rethinkinp
Academy of Management Review, 36(2)

) Dramatizing and organizing: Acting and being,
Journal of Organizational Change Management, 14(3): 218-24. |

Oswick, C., Keenoy, T., and Grant, D. (2002) Note: Metaphor and analogical reasoning in
organization theory: Beyond orthodoxy, Academy of Management Review, 27(2): 294-393

Otley, D. (1999) Performance management: a framework for management control Systems
research, Management Accounting Research, 10(4): 363-82.

Ouchi, W.G. (1981) Theory Z: How American Management Can Meet the Japanese Challenge,

New York: Addison-Wesley. ean
Ouchi, W. G. (2006) Power to the principals: Decentralization in three large school districts,

Organization Science, 17(2): 298-307. ra
Øverås, L. (1998) In search of the third code: An investigation of norms in literary translation.

Journal des Traducteurs/Meta: Translators’ Journal, 43(4): 557-70.
Owen-Smith, J., and Powell, W. W. (2004) Knowledge networks as channels and conduits: The

effects of spillovers in the Boston biotechnology community, Organization science, 15(1):
5-21.

Oyemomi, O., Liu, $., Neaga, I., and Alkhuraiji, A. (2016) How knowledge sharing and business
process contribute to organizational performance: Using the fsQCA approach, Journal of

Business Research, 69(11): 5222-27.
Ozen, $. and Berkman, U. (2007) Cross-national reconstruction of managerial practices: TQM

in Turkey, Organization Studies, 28(6): 825-51.
Packard, D., Kirby, D., and Lewis, K.R. (1995) The HP way: How Bill Hewlett and I built our
Company, New York: Harper Business,
Page, L. (2019) Goodbye, shanzhai: Intellectual property rights and the end of copycat China,
University of Western Australia Law Review, 45(1): 185-95.
Pallas, J., Fredriksson, M., and Wedlin, L. (2016) Translating institutional logics: When the
media logic meets professions, Organization Studies, 37(11): 1661-84.
Pang, L. (2008) China Who Makes and Fakes: A Semiotics of the Counterfeit, Theory, Culture
& Society, 25(6): 117-40.
Paradis, M. (2004) A Neurolinguistic Theory of Bilingualism, Amsterdam: John Benjamins
Publishing.
Parasuraman, A., Berry, L.L., and Zeithaml, V.A. (1993) More on improving service quality
measurement, Journal of Retailing, 69(1): 140-8.
Parks, R.B., Baker, P.C., Kiser, L., Oakerson, R., Ostrom, E., Ostrom, V. and Wilson, R.
(1981) Consumers as coproducers of public services: Some economic and institutional
considerations, Policy Studies Journal, 9(7): 1001-11.


References 283

Parsons, T. (1951) The Social System, New York: ‘The Free press,

at R.T. and Athos, A.G. (1981) The art of Japanese management, Business Horizons, 24(6):
83-53.

Patel, P.C., Kohtamaki, M., Parida, V., and Wincent, J. (2015)
experimentation and firm performance: The ena
Management Journal, 36(11): 1739-49.

Patterson, T. and Harms, P. (2019) "That's Interesting! Or is it? On the Incommensurability

of Academic and Practitioner Interests, Academy of Management Proceedings 1: Published
online https://journals.aom.org/doi/abs/ 10.5465/AMBPP.2019.276

Paulin, D. and Suneson, K. (2015) Knowledge transfer, knowledge sharing and knowledge

barriers—three blurry terms in KM, Leading Issues in Knowledge Management 2(2): 78-92.
Pavlou, P.A., and El Sawy, O.A. (2006) From IT leveraging competence to competitive advan-

tage in turbulent environments: The case of new product development, Information Systems
Research, 1703): 198-227,

Peal, E. and Lambert, W.E. (1962) The relation of bilingualism to intelligence, Psychological
Monographs: General and Applied, 76(27): 1-23.

Pearson, B.Z., and Fernandez, S.C. (1994) Patterns of interaction in the lexical growth in two
languages of bilingual infants and toddlers, Language Learning, 44(4): 617-53.

Peltokorpi, V., Froese, F.J., Reiche, B.S., and Klar, S. (2022) Reverse knowledge flows: How and

when do preparation and reintegration facilitate repatriate knowledge transfer?, Journal of
Management Studies. doi:10.1111/joms.12802

Peng, M.W., Ahlstrom, D., Carraher, S.M., and Shi, WS. (2017) History and the debate over
intellectual property, Management and Organization Review, 13(1): 15-38.

Penn, R. and Simpson, R. (1986) The development of skilled work in the British coal mining
industry, 1870-1985, Industrial Relations Journal, 17(4): 339-49.

Perry-Smith, J. and Mannucci, P.V. (2015) 12 social networks, creativity, and entrepreneurship,
in C.E. Shalley, M. Hitt, and J. Zhou (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Creativity, Innovation,
and Entrepreneurship, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 205-24.

Pertusa-Ortega, E.M., Zaragoza-Saez, P., and Claver-Cortés, E. (2010) Can formalization,
complexity, and centralization influence knowledge performance?, Journal of Business
Research, 63(3): 310-20.

Pertusa-Ortega, E. M., Molina-Azorin, J. F., and Claver-Cortés, E. (2009) Competitive strate-
gies and firm performance: A comparative analysis of pure, hybrid and ‘stuck-in-the-
middlestrategies in Spanish firms, British Journal of Management, 20(4): 508-23.

Pescosolido, B.A. and Levy, J. (2002) The role of social networks in health, illness, disease and
healing: The accepting present, the forgotten past, and the dangerous potential for a com-
placent future, in J.A. Levy and B.A. Pescosolido (eds.) Social Networks and Health. New
York: JAI: 3-28,

Pestoff, V. (2012) Co-production and third sector social services in Europe: Some concepts and
evidence, Voluntas: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 23(4):

1102-18.
Peteraf, M.A. (1993) The cornerstones of competitive advantage: a resource-based view.

Strategic Management Journal, 14(3): 179-91.

Phelps, C., Heidl, R., and Wadhwa, A. (2012) Knowledge, networks, and knowledge networks:
A review and research agenda. Journal of Management, 38(4): 1115-66.

Phillips, G.A. (1976) The General Strike: The Politics of Industrial Conflict, London: Weidenfeld

and Nicolson, el
Piazza, A. and Abrahamson, E. (2020) Fads and fashions in management practices: Tak-

ing stock and looking forward, International Journal of Management Reviews, 22(3):
264-86,

Entrepreneurial orientation-as-
bling role of absorptive capacity. Strategic


284 References

Viewpoints: Metaphor and Monsters: Children’s Story

sh, 24(4): 415-40.

Pierce, J.R. (2012) An Introduction to Information Theory: Symbols, Signals and Noise, New

k: Dover Publications. | 7
krige ind MacDuffie, J.P. (1999) Transferring competitive advantage across borders: a stud

‘ 4 3 p y

America, in J.K. Liker, W.M. Fruin, and Ps, 4
f e auto transplants in North | Adler
‘ods \. Remade in America: Transplanting and Transforming Japanese Management Systems

vare) : 39-74,
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press: 39 2 Pray
Pin " r Henry, N. Jenkins, M., and Tallman, S. (2003) From industrial districts” to know.

edge clusters”: a model of knowledge dissemination and competitive advantage in industrial

| 3(4): 373-88.
avclomerations, Journal of Economic Geography, | |
Podoiny, 1.M. (2009) The buck stops (and starts) at business school, Harvard Business Review

87(6): 62-7.
Podolny, J.M. and Page, K.L. (1998)

Sociology, 24(1): 57-76.
Polanyi, K. (1944) The Great Transformation, Boston, MA: Beacon Press.

Polanyi, M. (1958) Personal Knowledge. Towards a Post Critical Philosophy, London: Royt.

ledge. |
Polanyi, M. (1962) Tacit knowing: Its bearing on some problems of philosophy, Reviews of

Modern Physics, 34(4): 601-16.

Polanyi, M. (1967) The Tacit Dimension, New York: Anchor Books.

Polizzotti, M. (2018) Sympathy for the Traitor: Å T ranslation Manifesto, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

Poole, E.J.P. (1986) Metaphors and maps: Towards comparison in the anthropology of religion,
Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 54(3): 411-57.

Popper, K.R. (1959) The Logic of Scientific Discovery, New York: Science.

Porter, M.E. (1980) Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors,

New York: The Free Press.
Porter, M.E. (1990) The Competitive Advantage of Nation, New York: Free Press.

Posen, H.E. and Martignoni, D. (2018) Revisiting the imitation assumption: Why imita-
tion may increase, rather than decrease performance heterogeneity, Strategic Management
Journal, 39(5): 1350-69.

Posner, R.A. (1981) The economics of privacy, The American Economic Review, 71(2): 405-9,

Postrel, S. (2002) Islands of shared knowledge: Specialization and mutual understanding in
problem-solving teams, Organization Science, 13(3): 303-20.

Powell, W.W. (1998) Learning from collaboration: Knowledge and networks in the biotech-
nology and pharmaceutical industries. California Management Review, 40(3): 228-40.

Powell, W.W. and Brantley, P. (1992) Competitive cooperation in biotechnology: Learning
through networks? in N. Nohria and R. Eccles (eds.), Networks and Organizations, Boston,
MA: Harvard Business School Press: 366-94,

Powell, W.W., Gammal, D.L., and Simard, C. (2005) Close encounters: The circulation of
reception of managerial practices in the San Francisco bay area nonprofit community, in
B. Czarniawska and G. Sevön (eds.), Global Ideas. How Ideas, Objects and Practices Travel
in the Global Economy, Malmø: Liber & Copenhagen Business School Press, 233-58.

Powell, W.W., Koput, K.W. and Smith-Doerr, L. (1996) Interorganizational collaboration and
the locus of innovation: Networks of learning in biotechnology, Administrative Science
Quarterly, 41(1); 116-45.

Powell, W.W. and Snellman, K. (2004) The knowledge economy, Annual Review Sociology,
30(1): 199-220,

Network forms of organization, Annual Review of


|

ee Må : eee’
« a Jå Ara DER og
I 14) ig = (t - }
FÅ . id år Å rat ;
ot he AU Be
" * .- »
Lyn am

References 285

presas, M- (2000) Bilingual competence and tra

Adab (eds.), Developing Translation Competence, Amsterdam: John Benjamins: 19-31
Pressman, J.L. and Wildavsky, A. (1973) Implementation: How Great Expectations in Wash-

ington are Dashed in Oakland; Or Why Its Amazing Th
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 8 Mat Federal Programs Work at All,

Price, C.J. Green, D.W., and Von Studnitz, R, ( 1999) A functional imag; |
and language switching, Brain, 122(12). dim. ional imaging study of translation
‘em, R.L. and Butler, J.E. (2001 |

je sally detente os 001) Tautology in the resource-based view and the implications of
ex ue: Further comments, Academy of Management Review,
26(1): 57-66.

Probst, G. and Borzillo, S. (2008) Why communities of practice succeed and why they fail,
European Management Journal, 26(5): 335-47.

Provan, KG, Fish, A., and Sydow, J. (2007) Interorganizational networks at the network level:
A review of the empirical literature on whole networks, Journal of Management, 33(3):
479-516.

Prusak, L. (1997) Knowledge in Organizations, Boston, MA: Butterworth-Heineman.

Pugh, D.s., Hickson, D.J., Hinings, C.R., and Turner, C. (1968) Dimensions of organization
structure, Administrative Science Quarterly, 13(1): 65-105.

Puhakka, V. (2006) Effects of social capital on the opportunity recognition process, Journal of
Enterprising Culture, 14(02): 105-24.

Putnam, R.D. (1993) Making democracy work:Civic traditions in modern Italy, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

Pym, A. (1992) The relations between translation and material transfer, Target, 4(2): 171-89.

Pym, A. (2004) The Moving Text: Localization, Translation, and Distribution, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins Publishing.

Pym, A. (2015) Translating as risk management, Journal of Pragmatics, 85: 67-80.

Pym, A. (2017) Exploring Translation Theories, London: Routledge.

Pym, A. and Turk, H. (1998) Translatability, in M. Baker (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of
Translation Studies, London: Routledge: 273-76.

Pyun, H.O. and Lallemand, A.S. (2014) To reform the public administration, is it an impos-
sible mission? Case study of French public administration reforms since 1980s, Gestion et
Management Public, 3(3): 75-88.

Radaelli, G. and Sitton-Kent, L. (2016) Middle managers and the translation of new ideas
in organizations: Å review of micro-practices and contingencies, International Journal of

Management Reviews, 18(3): 311-32.
Ranson, $., Hinings, B., and Greenwood, R. (1980) The structuring of organizational struc-

tures, Administrative Science Quarterly, 25(1): 1-17.
Rao, H. and Drazin, R. (2002) Overcoming resource constraints on product innovation by

recruiting talent from rivals: A study of the mutual fund industry, 1986-1994, Academy of

management Journal, 45(3): 491-507.
Rashman, L., Withers, E., and Hartley, J. (2009) Organizational learning and knowledge in

public service organizations: A systematic review of the literature, International Journal of

Management Reviews, 11(4): 463-94. — |
Raud, R. (2007) An investigation of the conditions of literary borrowings in late Heian and

early Kamakura Japan, in R. Cox (ed.), The Culture of Copying in Japan—Critical and

Historical Perspectives, New York: Routledge: 155-67. ate
Readence, J.E., Baldwin, R.S., Martin, M.A., and O'Brien, D.G. (1984) Metaphorical inter-

pretation: An investigation of the salience imbalance hypothesis, Journal of Educational
Psychology, 76(4): 659-67.

nslation competence, in C. Schaffner and B,


286 References

Network structure and knowledge transfer: The effec

ts of
ience Quarterly, 48(2): 240-67,

Reagans, R. and McEvily, B. (2003)

cohesion and range, Administrative Sc | nej PN
Reay, T., Berta, W., and Kohn, M. K. (2009) What's the eviden e-based manage.

wes, 23(4): 5-18.
¢ demy of Management Perspectives, 4. pa
keg T ‘eae Golden- Biddle, K. Goodrick, E., Williams, B. E., Casebeer,
Hinings, C. R. (2013) Transforming new ideas
spective on the institutionalization of practices,

963-90, ei | |
Reay, T., Golden-Biddle, K., and Germann, K. (2006) Legitimizing å new role: Small wins ang

microprocesses of change, Academy of Management Jour nal, 4905): 9777-38, |

Reed, R. and DeFillippi, R.J. (1990) Causal ambiguity, barriers to imitation, and Sustainable
competitive advantage, Academy of Management Review, 15(1): = a

Reiche, B.S. (2012) Knowledge benefits of social capital upon repatriation: A longitudinal Study
of international assignees, Journal of Management Studies, 49(6): 1052-77, |

Reinhold, S., Beritelli, P., and Griinig, R. (2019) A business model typology for destination
management organizations, Tourism Review, 74(6): 1135-32. |

Reiss, K. and Vermeer, H.J. (1984) Grundlegung einer allgemeinen Translationstheorie, Tibin.
gen: Niemeyer. |

Ren, M. (2019) Why technology adoption succeeds or fails: an exploration from the perspec-
tive of intra-organizational legitimacy, The Journal of Chinese Sociology, 6(1): 1-26.

Richards, I.A. (1937) Interpretation in Teaching, London: Kegan Paul, Trench Trubner,

Riege, A. (2005) Three-dozen knowledge-sharing barriers managers must consider, Journal of

Knowledge Management, 9(3): 18-35. dn
Riege, A. (2007) Actions to overcome knowledge transfer barriers in MNCs, Journal of

Knowledge Management, 11(1): 48-67.

Riggs, W. and Von Hippel, E. (1994) Incentives to innovate and the sources of innovation: the
case of scientific instruments, Research Policy, 23(4): 459-70.

Ring, P.S. and Van de Ven, A.H. (1994) Developmental processes of cooperative interorgani-
zational relationships. Academy of Management Review, 19(1): 90-118.

Ringberg, T.V., Luna, D., Reihlen, M., and Peracchio, L.A. (2010) Bicultural-bilinguals: The
effect of cultural frame switching on translation equivalence, International Journal of Cross
Cultural Management, 10(1): 77-92.

Ringov, D.P., Liu, H., Jensen, R., and Szulanski, G. (2017) Adaptation and Unit Performance
in Replicating Organizations, Academy of Management Proceedings, 1, p. 12258.

Riusala, K. and Smale, A. (2007) Predicting stickiness factors in the international transfer of
knowledge through expatriates, International Studies of Management & Organization, 37(3)
16-43.

Rivkin, J.W. (2001) Reproducing knowledge: Replication without imitation at moderate
complexity. Organization Science, 12(3): 274-93.

Roberts, N., Galluch, P. S., Dinger, M., and Grover, V. (2012) Absorptive capacity and informa-
tion systems research: Review, synthesis, and directions for future research, MIS Quarterly,
36(2): 625-48,

Robinson, D. (1998a) Metaphrase, in M. Baker (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation
Studies, London: Routledge: 153-54,

Robinson, D. (1998b) Imitation, in M. Baker (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation
Studies, London: Routledge: 111-12.
Rosenstone, R. A, (1980) Learning from those “imitative” Japanese: Another side of the

American experience in the Mikados Empire, The American Historical Review, 85(3):
972-95.

| as Å, and
into practice: An activity based per-

Journal of Management Studies, 50(6)


|
|

=> ae Oe > Sp

References 287

Rosiello, Å. Mestroeni, M,, Castle, D. and Phillips, P.W. (2015) Clusters, technological dis-
tricts and smart specialization: An empirical analysis of policy implementation challenges,
International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management, 19(5-6): 304-26

Rothe-Neves, R. (2007) Notes on the concept of translator's c |  Røvlota

mm °
rraduccid, 14: 125-38. ompetence, Quaderns: Revista de

Rottenburg, R. (1996) When organizations travel: On intercultural translation, in B, Czarni-

= G. Sevon (eds.), Translating Organizational Change, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter:

191-240.

Rousseau, D.M. and McCarthy, S. (2007) Educating managers from an evidence-based per-
spective, Academy of Management Learning & Education, 6(1): 84-101.

Rouyre, A. and Fer nandez, AS. (2019) Managing knowledge sharing-protecting tensions in
coupled innovation projects among several competitors, California Management Review,
62(1): 95-120.

Røvik, K.A. (1996) Deinstitutionalization and the logic of fashion, in B. Czarniawska and G.
Sevön (eds.), Translating Organizational Change, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter: 139-72.

Røvik, K.A. (1998) Moderne organisasjoner: Trender I Organisasjonsstenkningen ved
Tusenårsskiftet (Modern organizations: Trends in Organizational Thinking by the Millen-
nium Turn), Bergen: Fagbokforlaget.

Røvik, K.A. (2002) The secrets of the winners: Management ideas that flow, in K. Sahlin-
Andersson and L. Engwall (eds.), The Expansion of Management Knowledge: Carriers, Ideas
and Sources, Stanford, CA, Stanford University Press: 113-44.

Rovik, K.A. (2014) Reformideer og deres tornefulle vei inn i skolefeltet (Circulating reform ideas
and their paths to the educational field, in K.A. Røvik, TV. Eilertsen and E. Moksnes Furu
(eds.), Reformideer i norsk skole (Reform ideas in the Norwegian educational system), Oslo:
Cappelen Damm Akademisk.

Røvik, K.A. (2007) Trender og Translasjoner: Ideer som Former det 21. århundrets Organ-
isasjon (Trends and Translations: Ideas that Shape 21st-Century Organizations), Oslo:
Universitetsforlaget.

Røvik, K.A. (2011) From fashion to virus: An alternative theory of organizations" handling of
management ideas, Organization Studies 32(5): 631-53.

Røvik, K.A. (2012) Organisasjonsendring som organisasjonsgjøring (Organizational change

as constructing organizations), Magma, 15(0812): 49-58.
Røvik, K.A. (2014) Translasjon - en alternativ doktrine for implementering, trans: Transla-

tion - an alternative implementation doctrine, in Røvik, K.A., Eilertsen, T.V., and Moksens
Furu, E. (Eds.), Reformideer i Norsk Skole (trans: Reform Ideas in the Norwegian Educational

System), 403-16, Oslo: Cappelen Damm Akademisk.
Røvik, K.A. (2016) Knowledge Transfer as Translation: Review and Elements of an Instrumen-

tal Theory, International Journal of Management Reviews, 18(3): 290-310.

Røvik, K.A. (2019) Instrumental understanding of management ideas, in A. Sturdy, S.
Heusinkveld, T. Reay, and D. Strang (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Management Ideas,
Oxford: Oxford University Press: 120-38.

Rovik, K.A., Blindheim, B.T., and Klemsdal, L. (2021) Organisasjonsdesign som kompleks
økologi (Organizational design as complex ecology), in B.I. Blindheim, L. Klemsdal, and
K.A. Røvik (eds.), Design av organisasjon (Design of rganization), Oslo: Universitetsforlaget,

241-49,
Røvik, K.A. and Pettersen, H. (2014) Masterideer (Master-ideas), in K.A. Rovik, T.V. Eil-

ertsen, and E. Mokses Furu (eds.), Reformideer i Norsk Skole: Spredning, oversettelse og
implementering (Reform ideas in the Norwegian School Sector: Diffusion, translation and

implementation), Oslo: Cappelen Damm: 53-86.


288 References

Rubel, PG., and Rosman, A. (2003) Translating Cultures: Perspectives on Translation and

Anthropology, London: Berg. | |
a (1945) Knowing how and knowing that: The presidential address, Proceedings Of the

Aristotelian Society, 46: 1-16. ra
Ryne, | came .M,, and Daft, R.L. (2001) Across the great divide: Knowledge Creation

and transfer between practitioners and academics, Academy of Management Journal, 44(2)

340-55, å maren. Å
Sackett. PR. and Larson, J.R. (1990) Research strategies and tactics in industrial and Organi.

zational psychology, in M.D. Dunnette and L.M. Hough (eds.), Handbook of Industria] and
Organizational Psychology, Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press: 419-89,

| ! ‘no ideas: Imitation, translation and editing ;
Sahlin, K. and Wedlin, L. (2008) Circulating ideas: 8, in R
Greenwood, C, Oliver, K. Sahlin, and R. Suddaby (eds.), The SAGE Handbook of Organiza.

tional Institutionalism, Los Angeles/ London; Sage: 218-42. |
Sahlin-Andersson, K. (1996) Imitation by editing success: the construction of Organizational
fields, in B. Czarniawska and G. Sevön (eds.), Translating Organizational Change, Berlin.

Walter de Gruyter, 69-92. |
Sahlin-Andersson, K. and Engwall, Li (2002) Carriers, flows and sources of Management

knowledge, in K. Sahlin-Andersson, and L. Engwall (eds.), The Expansion of Management
Knowledge—Carriers, flows, and Sources, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press: 3-32,

Saka, A. (2004) The cross-national diffusion of work systems: Translation of Japanese opera-
tions in the UK, Organization Studies, 25(2): 209-28.

Sakhdari, K. (2016) Absorptive capacity: review and research agenda, Journal of Organisationq]
Studies and Innovation, 3(1): 34-50.

Salama-Carr, M. (1998) French tradition, in M. Baker (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of Trans-
lation Studies, London: Routledge: 409-17.

Sandberg, J. and Alvesson, M. (2021) Meanings of theory: Clarifying theory through typifica-
tion, Journal of Management Studies, 58(2): 487-516.

Santoro, G., Vrontis, D., and Pastore, A. (2017) External knowledge sourcing and new product
development: evidence from the Italian food and beverage industry, British Food Journal,
119 (11): 2373-87.

Santoro, M.D., and Bierly, P. (2006) Facilitators of knowledge transfer in university-industry
collaborations: A knowledge-based perspective, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Manage-
ment 53 (4): 495-507,

Sanwal, A. (2008) The myth of best practices, Journal of Corporate Accounting & Finance, 19(5)
51-60.

Sapir, E. (1929) /1949) The status of linguistics as a science. Reprinted, in Selected Writings of
Edward Sapir in Language, Culture, and Personality, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
of California Press.

Schåffner, C. (1998) Skopos theory, in M. Baker (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation
Studies, London: Routledge: 235-38.

Schaffner, C. and Adab, B. (2000) Developing Translation Competence, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins Publishing.

Schein, E.H. (1970) Occupational Socialization in the Professions: The Case of Role Innovation,
Cambridge, MA: MIT.

Schein, E.H. (1985) Defining organizational culture, in J.M. Shafritz, J.S. Ott, and YS. Jang
(eds.), Classics of Organization Theory, Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth: 360-7.

Schein, E.H. (1990) Organizational culture, American Psychological Association, 45(2):
109-19,

Schein, E.H. (2010) Organizational Culture and Leadership, New York: John Wiley & Sons.


-neuer JD: (2006) Om oversættelse af oversættelse
å ay-institutionalisters oversættelse af overs
(NOS) 4: 3-40.

høyet; J. De (2021) How Ideas Move: Iheories and M |
sche "jon: Routledge. odels of Translation in Organizations

MT d Kluge, A. (2009) Barriers t |
. hillings J, an | $ tO Organization |] ing:
oa d research, International Journal of Management ery mee Porn of theory
Schlossets E, (2001) Fast food Nation: The Dark Side of the All-America M | LB

Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. nh Meal, Boston, MA:

schminke, M. Ambrose, M.L. and Cropanzano, RS, (2000) The effect of organizational struc-

ture on perceptions of procedural fairness, Journal of Applied Psychology, 85(2): 294-304
Schmitt, Ås Borzillo, S. and Probst, G. (2012) Dont let knowledge walk away: Knowled e
retention during employee downsizing, Management Learning, 43(1): 53-74 |

schraeder, PJ. (2003) The state of the art in international democracy promotion: Results of a
joint European-North American research network, Democratization, 10(2): 21-44

Schumpeter; J.Å. (1934) The Theory of Economic Development, London: Oxford University
Press.

Schuster, M.A., McGlynn, E.A., and Brook, R.H. (1998) How good is the quali
in the United States? The Milbank Quarterly, 76(4): pan. Od is the quality of health care

Schutz, A. (1962) Concept and theory formation in the social sciences, in A. Schutz: Collected
papers I, Springer, Dordrecht: 48-66.

Schwartz, H. (1996) The Culture of the Copy: Striking Likenesses,
York: Zone Books.

Scotchmer, S. (2004) Innovation and Incentives, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Scott, W.R. (1987) The adolescence of institutional theory, Administrative Science Quarterly,
32(4): 493-511.

Scott, W.R. (1995) Institutions and Organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage.

Scott, W.R. and Davis, G.F. (2003) Networks in and Around Organization - Organizations and
Organizing, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall.

Seidler-de Alwis, R. and Hartmann, E. (2008) The use of tacit knowledge within innova-
tive companies: knowledge management in innovative enterprises, Journal of Knowledge
Management, 12 (1): 133-47.

Seleskovitch, D. (1978a) Language and cognition, in D, Gerver (ed.), Language Interpretation
and Communication, Boston, MA: Springer: 333-41,

Seleskovitch, D. (1978b) Interpreting for International Conferences, Washington, DC: Pen and
Booth,

Selmer, J., Chiu, R. K., and Shenkar, O. (2007) Cultural distance asymmetry in expatriate
adjustment, Cross Cultural Management: An International Journal, 1402): 150-60.

Selznick, P. (1949) TVA and the Grass Roots, Berkeley: University of California Press.

Serres, M. (1974/1982) Hermes: Literature, Science, Philosophy, Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins
University Press.

Sevön, G. (1996) Organizational imitation in identity transformation, in B. Czarniawska and
G. Sevön (eds.), Translating Organizational Change, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter: 49-67,

Shanon, B. (1992) Metaphor: From fixedness and selection to differentiation and creation.
Poetics Today, 13: 659-85. |

Shannon, C.E. (1948) A Mathematical Theory of Communication, Bell System Technical
Journal, 27(4); 623-66. |

Shannon, C.E. and Weaver, W. (1949) The Mathematical Theory of Communication, Urbana,

IL: University of Illinois Press.

Unreasonable Facsimiles, New


290 References

reating rigorous and relevant knowledge, Academy ,
0

Sharma, G. and Bansal, P (2020) Coc

386-410.
Management Journal, 63(2): - 7 sctneering Foundations of g
Shenhav, Y. (1999) Manufacturing Rationality: The Eng g if the Managerig

| | University Press.
Revolution, New York: Oxford H, må Wu, J. (2020) National culture and internat

snl: a » Dry Wang,
Shenkat, ©. Tallman, å | of International Business Studies, 51 (8):1-18.

business: A path forward, Journa | | |
p How Smart Companies Use Imitation to Gain a Strategic Edge

ool Press. |
ted: Towards a more rigorous conceptualization

Journal of International Business Studies, 32(3)

lonal

Shenkar, O. (2010) Copycats:
Boston, MA: Harvard Business Sch

Shenkar, O. (2001) Cultural distance revisi
and measurement of cultural differences.

519-35, «cq » oa] ‘ »
Shenkar, O., Luo, Y., and Yeheskel, O. (2008) From “distance” to “friction”: Substitutin

metaphors and redirecting intercultural research, Academy of Management Review: 33(4).

905-23.
Shepherd, D. A., and Suddaby, R. (2017

Management, 43(1): 59-86. | | å ed
Sherman, L.W. (2009) Evidence and liberty: The promise of experimental criminology, Crim.

inology & Criminal Justice, 9(1): 5-28. Age
Shils, E.A. and Finch, H.A. (1997) The Methodology of the Social Sciences, New York: Free Press.
Shreve, G.M. (2012) Bilingualism and translation, in Y. Gambier, and L. van Doorslaer (eds.),

Handbook of Translation, Amsterdam: Benjamins: 1-6. |
Sigala, M. and Chalkiti, K. (2007) Improving performance through tacit knowledge exter.

nalisation and utilisation: Preliminary findings from Greek hotels, International Journal of

Productivity and Performance Management, 56(5/6): 456-83.
Simonin, B.L. (1999) Ambiguity and the process of knowledge transfer in strategic alliances

Strategic Management Journal, 20(7): 595-623.
Singh, J. (2005) Collaborative networks as determinants of knowledge diffusion patterns,

Management Science, 51(5): 756-70.

Sjödin, D., Frishammar, J., and Thorgren, S. (2019) How individuals engage in the absorp-
tion of new external knowledge: A process model of absorptive capacity, Journal of Product
Innovation Management, 36(3): 356-80.

Skogan, W.G. (2008) Why Reforms Fail, Policing and Society, 18(1): 25-37.

Slåtten, K. (2020) Personal og HR-funksjonen I Norge 1945 til 2020. En historisk studie av
organisatoriske felt og institusjonelle logikker (The Personnel and HR-departments in Nor-
way 1945-2020. An historical study of organizational fields and institutional logics), Ph.D.
thesis. Department of Social Science, The Arctic University of Norway—Tromsø

Slavin, R.E. (2008) Perspectives on evidence-based research in education: What works?
Issues in synthesizing educational program evaluations, Educational Researcher, 37(1):
5-14.

Snell-Hornby, M. (2006) The Turns of Translations Studies: New Paradigms or Shifting View-
points? Amsterdam: John Benjamins Pub.

Snellman, K.E. (2012) Window-dressers and Closet Conformists: Organizational decoupling
revisited, Academy of Management Proceedings (1): p.14156.

Solli, R., P. Demediuk, and R. Sims, R. (2005) The namesake: on best value and other reform
marks, Copenhagen: Liber & Copenhagen Business School Press.
Song, Y., Gnyawali, D.R., Srivastava, M.K., and Asgari, E. (2018) In search of precision in

absorptive capacity research: A synthesis of the literature and consolidation of findings,
Journal of Management, 44(6): 2343-74.

Sosnovskikh, S. (2017) Industrial clusters in Russia: The development of special economic
zones and industrial parks, Russian Journal of Economics, 3(2): 174-99.

) Theory building: A review and integration, Journal 9 f


== > PPT PP we DØPE
> i

preses ae le i SETT KE SY EP =>

References 291

Souitaris, V. (2001) Strategic influences of technc
of Management, 12(2): 131-47,

Spender, J.C, (1993) Competitive Advanta
and its Strategic Implications, Academy

spyridonidis, D., Currie, G., Heusinkveld, §., Strauss K., and
ments in translation research, British Journal of Manage er krig New develop-

Srivastava, . Singh, he and Dhir, S. (2020) Culture and International business research: A
review an an agenda. International Business Review 29(4):101709

Stahl, ir kn I, Po Cerdin, J.L., and Taniguchi, M. (2009) Predictors of
turnover 1 Ons In learning-driven and demand-driven international assignments: The

role of repatriation concerns, satisfaction with company support, and perceived career
advancement opportunities, Human Resource Management, 48(1): 89-109

Stahl, G.K. and Sitkin, S.B. (2005) Trust in Mer teit?
gers & Acquisitions:
Human Resources, Palo Alto, CA: Stanford Business Si gn Managing Culture and

Stål, H.I. and Corvellec, H. (2018) A decoupling perspective on circular business model
ae Illustrations from Swedish apparel, Journal of Cleaner Production, 171:
Stamenkovic, D., Ichien, N., and Holyoak, KJ. (2019) Metaphor comprehension: An
individual-differences approach, Journal of Memory and Language, 105 (April): 108-18.
Starkey, K. and Madan, P. (2001) Bridging the relevance gap: Aligning stakeholders in the
future of management research, British Journal of Management, 12 (special issue): 3-26.
Stensaker, B. (2007) Quality as fashion: exploring the translation of a management idea into

higher education, in D. Westerheijden, B. Stensaker, and M.J. Rosa (eds.), Quality Assurance
in Higher Education, Dordrecht: Springer: 99-118.

Stevenson, W.B. and Gilly, M.C. (1991) Information processing and problem solving: The

migration of problems through formal positions and networks of ties, Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 34(4): 918-28.

Stewart, W.D. (1935) Mines, Machines and Men. [On the Condition of the Coal Industry],
London: PS King & Son.

Still, M.C. and Strang, D. (2009) Who does an elite organization emulate? Administrative
Science Quarterly, 54(1): 58-89.

Stine, P. (1990) Bible Translation and the Spread of the Church: The Last 200 Years, Leiden, New
York, Copenhagen: Brill.

Stock, G. N., Greis, N. P., and Fischer, W. A. (2001) Absorptive capacity and new product
development, The Journal of High Technology Management Research, 12(1): 77-91.

Strang, D. and Macy, M.W. (2001) In search of excellence: Fads, success stories, and adaptive
emulation, American Journal of Sociology, 107(1): 147-82.

Strang, D. and Meyer, J.W. (1993) Institutional conditions for diffusion, Theory and society,
22(4): 487-511.

Strang, D. and Still, M.C. (2006) Does ambiguity promote imitation, or hinder it? An empirical
study of benchmarking teams, European Management Review, 3(2): 101-12.

Sturdy, A. (2011) Consultancy’s consequences? A critical assessment of management consul-
tancy's impact on management, British Journal of Management, 22(3): 517-30.

Sturdy, A., Werr, A., and Buono, A.F. (2009) The client in management consultancy research:
Mapping the territory, Scandinavian Journal of Management, 25(3): 247-52.

Sturdy, A. and Wright, C. (2011) The active client: The boundary-spanning roles of internal
consultants as gatekeepers, brokers and partners of their external counterparts, Management
Learning, 42(5): 485-503.

Sturlusson, S. (1964) Heimskringla: History of the Kings of Norway (translated by L.M. Hollan-
der), Texas: University of Texas Press.

logical innovation in Greece, British Journal

of Management Proceedings (1): 37-41.


292 References

Suddaby, R. (2010) Editor's comments: Construct clarity in theories of management and
Suddaby, R.

lew, 35(3): 346-57.
wanizatl demy of Management Review, |
Ol pe a wtih! R. (2001) Colonizing knowledge: Commodification as a dynam).
Suddaby, R. and Gree he fessional service firms, Human Relations, 54(7): 933-53

‘ ' Saks | n in ro ‘ i 1
of jurisdictional expansion In P ) Introduction to special topic forum: where are

, Hardy, C.y and Huy, Q.N. (2011 | |
ge ra of organization? The Academy of Management Review, 36(2): 236-46,

Sultan, F. and Simpson, M.C. (2000) International service variants: airline passenger expecta.
on and perceptions of service quality, Jour nal of Ser eid ET 14 (3): 188-216.
Sun, PY.T, and Scott, J.L. (2005) An investigation of barriers to knowledge transfer, Journa] of

Knowledge Management, 9(2): 75-90.
Sunaoshi, Y., Kotabe, M. and Murray, J. Y. (2005)
factory floor: a case of a major Japanese automo

Journal of World Business, 40(1): 57-70. | | |
Szulanski, å (1994) Intra-firm transfer of best practice project. Executive summary of the

findings, APOC-Report, American Productivity & Quality Center, Houston, TX.
Szulanski, G. (1996) Exploring internal stickiness: Impediments to the transfer of best practice

within the firm, Strategic Management Journal, 17(S2): 27-43, | | |
Szulanski, G. (2000) The process of knowledge transfer: Å diachronic analysis of Stickiness,

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 82(1): 9-27.
Szulanski, G. (2003) Sticky Knowledge: Barriers to Knowing in the Firm, London: Sage,
Szulanski, G. and Cappetta, R. (2003) Stickiness: Conceptualizing, measuring, and predict-
ing difficulties in the transfer of knowledge within organizations, in M. Easterby-Smith
and M.A. Lyles (eds.), The Blackwell Handbook of Organizational Learning and Knowledge

Management, Malden, M.A. & Oxford: Blackwell: 513-34.
Szulanski, G., Cappetta, R., and Jensen, R.J. (2004) When and how trustworthiness matters:

Knowledge transfer and the moderating effect of causal ambiguity, Organization Science,
15(5): 600-13.

Szulanski, G. and Jensen, R. J. (2008) Growing through copying: The negative consequences
of innovation on franchise network growth, Research Policy, 37(10): 1732-41.

Szulanski, G., Ringov, D., and Jensen, R.J. (2016) Overcoming stickiness: How the timing of
knowledge transfer methods affects transfer difficulty, Organization Science, 27(2): 304-22.

Szulanski, G. and Winter, S. (2002) Getting it right the second time, Harvard Business Review,
80(1): 62-9,

Taddeo, R., Simboli, A., loppolo, G., and Morgante, A. (2017) Industrial symbiosis, networking
and innovation: The potential role of innovation poles, Sustainability, 9(2): 169-86.

Tailby, S. (2011) Taylorism in the Mines? Technology, Work Organization and Management
in British Coalmining before Nationalization, in M. Richardson and P. Nicholls (eds.), A
Business and Labour History of Britain, London: Palgrave Macmillan: 155-81.

Tallman, S. and Chacar, A. S. (2011) Knowledge accumulation and dissemination in MNEs: a
practice-based framework, Journal of Management Studies, 48(2): 278-304.

Tarde, G. (1903) The Laws of Imitation, New York: H. Holt.

Taussig, M. (1993) Mimesis and Alterity: A particular History of the Senses, New York:
Routledge.

Tavares, M. F. F. (2020, Across establishments, within firms: worker’s mobility, knowledge
transfer and survival, Journal for Labour Market Research, 54(1): 1-19.

Taylor, RW. (1911) Shop Management, New York: Harper & Brothers.

leece, D.J. (1977) Technology transfer by multinational firms: The resource cost of transferring
technological know-how, The Economic Journal, 87(346): 242-61.

Teece, D.J. (1981) The market for know-how and the efficient international transfer of tech-
nology, The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 458(1): 81-96.

How technology transfer really occurs on the
tive die manufacturer in the United States,


References 293

— isano, G., and Shuen, A
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., Å. (1997) Dynamic capabilitie or
Strategic Management Journal, 18(7): 509-33. pabilities and strategic management,

tell, E, Berggren, C., Brusoni, S, and Van de Ven, A. (2017) Managing knowledge inte-

gration across boundaries, in F. Tell, C. Berggren, §, Brusoni, and A. Van de Ven (eds.)
‘ wes

Managing Knowledge Integration across Boundari Cc ee
19-38. artes, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press:

Terry, E (2000) Transport: beyond predict and provide. What Works?, in H.T.O. Davies, S.M

Nutley, and P.C. Smith (eds.), What Works? Evidence. | va |
Services, Bristol: Policy Press: 187-205 ence-based Policy and Practice in Public

Tian, A.W. and Soo,
47(5): 116-32.

Tidd, J. and Thuriaux-Alemån, B. (2016) Innovation mana
adoption, variation, and effectiveness,

Tillotson, J.E. (2008) Fast food—
Today, 43(3): 107-13.

a — The err Då copy”: Mimesis and subversion in Hanegawa Töei's
senjin Ukie, in R. Cox (ed.), The Culture of Copyine in Critic istorical
Perspectives, New York: Routledge: 83-122, Sa eee trer

Todorova, G., and Durisin, B. (2007) Absorptive capacity: Valuing a reconceptualization,
Academy of Management Review, 32(3): 774-86.

Tödtling, F. and Trippl, M. (2005) One size fits all?: Towards a differentiated regional innova-
tion policy approach, Research Policy, 34(8): 1203-19.

Torfing, J. and Triantafillou, P. (2016) Enhancing Public Innovation by Transforming Public
Governance, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Torre, A. (2008) On the role played by temporary geographical proximity in knowledge
transmission. Regional Studies, 42(6): 869-89,

Torsteinsen, H. (2006) Resultatenhetsmodellen i kommunal tjenesteproduksjon: instrument,

symbol eller maktmiddel? Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Political Science, The Arctic
University of Norway, Tromsø.

Toulmin, S. (1953/1967) The Philosophy of Science, London: Hutchinson and Co.

Tourangeau, R. and Sternberg, R.J. (1981) Aptness in metaphor, Cognitive Psychology, 13(1):
27-55.

Tourangeau, R. and Sternberg, R.J. (1982) Understanding and appreciating metaphors, Cogni-
tion, 11(3): 203-44.

Tourish, D. (2020) The triumph of nonsense in management studies, Academy of Management
Learning & Education, 19(1): 99-109.

Toury, G. (1978) The nature and role of norms in translation, in Literature and Translation:
New Perspectives in Literary Studies, Leuven: ACCO: 83-100.

Toury, G. (1980) In Search of a Theory of Translation. Porter Institute for Poetics and Semiotics:
Tel Aviv University.

Toury, G. (1984) The notion of “native translator” and translation teaching, in W. Wilss and G.
Thome (eds.), Die Theorie des Ubersetzens und ihr Aufschusswert fur die Ubersetzungs und

Dolmetschdidaktik, Tubingen, Narr: 186-95.
Toury, G. (1985) A rationale for descriptive translation studies, in T. Hermans (ed.), The

Manipulation of Literature, London: Croom Helm: 16-41.

Toury, G. (1986) Natural translation and the making of a native translator, Textcontext, 1:
11-29,

Toury, G. (1995) Descriptive Translation Studies and Beyond, Amsterdam: Benjamins,

Tracey, P., Dalpiaz, E., and Phillips, N. (2018) Fish out of water: Translation, legitimation, and

new venture creation, Academy of Management Journal, 61(5): 1627-66.

C. (2018) Enriching individual absorptive capacity, Personnel Review,

gement practices: cross-sectorial
R&D Management, 46($3): 1024-43.

Ray Kroc and the dawning of the age of McDonald's, Nutrition


294 References
! hological consequence
Some social and psyc | re $ of t
Trist, E.L. and Bamforth, K.W. ( 1951) 90 tion of the psychological situation and defe

ing: xamina
er ga ee nie 7 "al structure and technological content of the wor
| | the social § h
work group in relation to

Human Relations, 4(1): ar H., and Pollock, A.B. (2013) Organizational Choice.
Trist, E.L., Higgin, G.W., å der Changing Technologies, London: Routledge,

oe un
bilities of Groups at the Coal 1900 anizational networks: Effects of networ

in intraorg K pog;
Tsai, W. 1) Knowledge transfer in In å SI-
psionic in nå acity on business unit innovation and performance, Academy yf

. 996-1004.

ent Journal, 44(5): 996-1004, a Prag

Re W. (2002) ge structure of “coopetition within a multiunit organization: Coordina.
tion competition and intraorganizational knowledge sharing, Organization Science, 13(2)

he long.
Nees Of g

Capa.

179-90. lue creation: The role of ;
(1998) Social capital and value : OF intrafirm
Tsai, W. and Ghoshal, S. (1998) I. 41(4): 464-76.

networks, Academy of Management Journa | | | wi
Tsang, E.W. (2002) Acquiring knowledge by foreign partners from international joint Ventures

in a transition economy: Learning-by-doing and learning myopia. Strategic Managemen

Journal, 23(9): 835-54. | | |
Tsoukas, H. (1991) The missing link: Å transformational view of metaphors in Organizational

science, Academy of Management Review, 16(3): 566-85. Gan Kid
Tsoukas, H. (1993) Analogical reasoning and knowledge generation in organization theory,

Organization Studies, 14(3): 323-46. |
Tucker, A.L., Nembhard, I.M., and Edmondson, A.C. (2007) Implementing new practices.

An empirical study of organizational learning in hospital intensive care units, Management

Science, 53(6): 894-907. | ker å
Tung, R.L. (1987) Expatriate assignments: Enhancing success and minimizing failure,

Academy of Management Perspectives, 1(2): 117-25.
Tung, R. L., and Verbeke, A. (2010) Beyond Hofstede and GLOBE: Improving the quality of

cross-cultural research, Journal of International Business Studies, 41(8): 1259-74,
Turkina, E. and Van Assche, A. (2018) Global connectedness and local innovation in industrial

clusters, Journal of International Business Studies, 49(6): 706-28.
Urry, J. (2004) The “system” of automobility, Theory, Culture & Society, 21(4-5): 25-39,
Uzzi, B. (1996) The sources and consequences of embeddedness for the economic performance

of organizations: The network effect, American Sociological Review, 61(4): 674-98,

Uzzi, B. and Lancaster, R. (2003) Relational embeddedness and learning: The case of bank loan
managers and their clients, Management Science, 49(4): 383-99,

Valdés, C. (2017) Advertising translation, in C. Millan and F. Bartrina (eds.), The Routledge

Handbook of Translation Studies, New York: Routledge, 303-16.
Van de Ven, A.H., and Ferry, D.L. (1980) Measuring and assessing organizations. New York:

Wiley.

Van der Heiden, P., Pohl, C., Mansor, S., and van Genderen, J. (2016) Necessitated absorptive
capacity and metaroutines in international technology transfer: A new model, Journal of
Engineering and Technology Management, 41: 65-78.

Van Eijk, C. and Gascö, M. (2018) Unravelling the Co-Producers: Who are They and What
Motivations do They Have?, in T. Brandsen, T. Steen, and B. Verschuere (eds.), Co-
production and Co-Creation: Engaging Citizens in Public Services, New York: Routledge:
63-76.

Van Gils, M., Vissers, G., and De Wit, J. (2009) Selecting the right channel for knowledge trans-

fer between industry and science: consider the R&D-activity, European Journal of Innovation
Management, 12(4): 492-511.


References 295

Van Grinsven, M., Heusinkveld, S,, and Cornelissen, J. (2016)

Translating management con-
cepts: Towards a typology of alternative approaches, International Journal of Management

Van Maanen, E. and Schein,
in B.M. Staw (ed.)

209-64.
Van Veen, K., Bezemer, J., and Karsten, L. (2011) Diffusion,

of managers in the fashion setting process: the case of
(2): 149-64.

Van Wijk, R., Jansen, JJ. and Lyles, M.A. (2008) Inter-and intra-organizational knowledge
transfer: a meta-analytic review and assessment of its antecedents an

of Management Studies, 45(4): 830-53.

Varian, H.R. (2005) Copying and copyright, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(2): 121-38.
Veblen, T. (1914) The Instinct of Workmanship and the State of Industrial Arts, New York: The
Macmillan Company.

Veenhoven, R. (1984) Conditions of Happiness, Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing.

Venuti, L. (1998) Strategies of translation, in M. Baker (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of
Translation Studies, London: Routledge: 240-4,

Venuti, L., (1995) Translation, Authorship, Copyright, The Translator, 1 (1): 1-24.

Venuti, L. (1998) American tradition, in M. Baker (ed.), The Routledge Encyclopedia of
Translation Studies, London and New York: Routledge: 305-16.

Venuti, L. (2012) The Translation Studies Reader, London: Routledge.

Venuti, L. (2017) The Translators Invisibility: A History of Translation, London: Routledge.

Vermeer, H. (1986) Voraussetzungen fir eine Translationstheorie—Einige Kapitel Kultur und
Sprachtheorie; Institut fiir Ubersetzen und Dolmetschen, Heidelberg: Selbstverlag.

Vermeer, H.J. (1978) Ein Rahmen fir eine allgemeine Translationstheorie, Lebende Sprachen,
23(3): 99-102. |

Vermeer, H.J. (1998) Didactics of translation, in M. Baker (ed.), Routledge Encyclopaedia of
Translation Studies, London: Routledge: 60-3.

Vinay, J.P. and Darbelnet, J. (1958) Stylistique Comparée du Francais et de I -Anglais: Méthode
de Traduction. Paris: Didier. (Translated and edited by Sager, J.C. and Hamel, M.J. (1995)

Comparative Stylistics of French and English—A Methodology for Translation, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.

Vlaar, PW. Van den Bosch, F.A., and Volberda, H.W. (2006) Coping with problems of under-
standing in interorganizational relationships: Using formalization as a means to make sense.
Organization Studies, 27(11): 1617-38.

Vlajcic, D., Marzi, G., Caputo, A., and Dabic, M. (2019) The role of geographical distance
on the relationship between cultural intelligence and knowledge transfer, Business Process
Management Journal, 25(1): 104-25.

Volberda, H.W., Foss, N.J. and Lyles, M.A. (2010) Perspective—Absorbing the concept of
absorptive capacity: How to realize its potential in the organization field, Organization
Science, 21(4): 931-51.

Von Hippel, E. (1994) “Sticky information” and the locus of problem solving: implications for
innovation, Management Science, 40(4): 429-39.

Von Krogh, G. (1998) Care in knowledge creation, California Management Review, 40(3):
133-153.

Von Krogh, G., Ichijo, K., and Nonaka, I. (2000) Enabling knowledge creation: How to Unlock
the Mystery of Tacit Knowledge and Release the Power of Innovation, Oxford UK: Oxford

University Press.

Å “1 (1978) Toward a theory of organizational socialization,
esearch in Organizational Behaviour, Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1:

translation and the neglected role
MANS, Management Learning, 42

d consequences, Journal


296 References

Huysman, M., and Sergeeva, A.V. (2022) In the land of the blind, the

edge brokerage in the age 0

One.

Waardenburg, L f learning algorithms, Organizatj,
n

eyed man is king: Knowl

Science, 33(1): 59-82.
Weeraas, A., and Sataøen,

ment into practice, Scandinavian Jour
Wagner, R.K. and Sternberg, R.J. (1987)

Business and Psychology, 1(4): 301-12. |
Wah, L. (1999) Making knowledge stick: No knowledge management program an succeed

without a shift in corporate culture and that new culture must be woven into every business

process, Management Review, 88(5): 24-33. |
Waldorff, S. B. and Madsen, M. H. (2022) Translating to Maintain Existing Practices

Micro-tactics in the implementation of a new management concept, Organization Studies,

01708406221112475. .
Walgenbach, P. (1997) Between “show business and galley’: On the use of ISO 9009 stan-

dards in companies, Paper presented at the SCANCOR/SCORE Seminar in Standardization

at Arild, Sweden, September 18, 1997.
Walgenbach, P. and Hegele, C. (2001) What can an apple learn from an orange? Or: what do

companies use benchmarking for? Organization, 8(1): 121-44. |
Walker, H.A. and Cohen, B.P. (1985) Scope statements: Imperatives for evaluating theory,

American Sociological Review, 50(3): 288-301. |
Walsham, G. (1991) Organizational metaphors and information systems research, European

Journal of Information Systems, 1(2): 83-94.
Walton, $. and Huey, J. (1993) Sam Walton, Made in America: My Story. New York: Bantam,
Wanberg, J., Javernick-Will, A., Taylor, J.E., and Chinowsky, P. (2015) The effects of organiza-
tional divisions on knowledge-sharing networks in multi-lateral communities of practice,

Engineering Project Organization Journal, 5(2-3): 118-32.
Wang, C.L. and Ahmed, P.K. (2003) Structure and structural dimensions for knowledge-based

organization, Measuring Business Excellence, 7(1): 51-62.
Wasserman, $. and Faust, K. (1994) Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications,

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Weber, M. (1924) Gesammelte aufsåtze zur soziologie und sozialpolitik, Tubingen: Mohr.

Weber, M. (1947) The Theory of Social and Economic Organization, New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.

Wedlin, L. and Sahlin, K. (2017) The imitation and translation of management ideas, in
R. Greenwood, C. Oliver, T. Lawrence, and R.E. Meyer (eds.), The SAGE Handbook on
Organizational Institutionalism (2nd ed.), London, UK: Sage: 102-27.

Wegner, D.M., Erber, R., and Raymond, P. (1991) Transactive memory in close relationships,
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61(6): 923-29,

Wellisz, S. (1953) Strikes in coal-mining, The British Journal of Sociology, 4(4): 346-66.

Wellstein, B. and Kieser, A. (2011) Trading “best practices”—a good practice? Industrial and
Corporate Change, 20(3): 683-719,

Wenger, E.C. and Snyder, W.M. (2000) Communities of practice: The organizational frontier,
Harvard Business Review, 78(1): 139-46,

Werr, A. and Stjernberg, T. (2003) Exploring management consulting firms as knowledge
systems, Organization Studies, 24(6): 881-908.

Westney, D.E. (1987) Imitation and Innovation: The T ransfer of Western Organizational Patterns
to Meiji Japan, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Westney D.E. (1993) Institutionalization theory and the multinational corporation, in S.

Ghoshal and D.E. Westney (eds.), Organization Theory and the Multinational Corporation,
New York: St. Martin’s Press: 53-76.

1 ity, Translating reputatio
H.L. (2014) Trapped in conformity 1 fase
nal of Management Studies, 30(2): 149-262. ge

Tacit knowledge in managerial success. Journal of


- == a ee ee ns | ke å

References 297

Westney DE. and Piekkari, R. (2020) Reversing the translation flow: Moving organizational
practices from Japan to the US, Journal of Management Studies, 57(1): 57-86.
Westney, D.E., Piekkari, R., Koskinen, K., and Tietze, 8. (2022) Crossing borders and bound-

aries: Translation ecosystems in international business, International Business Review, 31(5):
102030.

Westphal, J.D. and Zajac, E.J. (2001) Decoupling policy from practice: The case of stock
repurchase programs, Administrative Science Quarterly, 46(2): 202-28.

Whetten, D.A. (1989) What constitutes a theoretical contribution? Academy of Management
Review, 14(4): 490-5.

Whetten, D.A, Felin, I, and King, B.G, (2009) The practice of theory borrowing in orga-
nizational studies: Current issues and future directions, Journal of Management, 35(3):
537-63.

Whitehead, L. (1996) The International Dimensions of Democratization: Europe and the
Americas, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Whittle, A., Suhomlinova, O., and Mueller, F. (2010) Funnel of interest: the discur-

sive translation of organizational change, Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 46(1):
16-37.

Wickert, C., Post, C., Doh, J. P., Prescott, J. E., and Prencipe, A. (2021) Management research
that makes a difference: Broadening the meaning of impact, Journal of Management Studies,
58(2): 297-320.

Willem, A. and Buelens, M. (2009) Knowledge sharing in inter-unit cooperative episodes:

The impact of organizational structure dimensions. International Journal of Information
Management, 29(2): 151-60.

Williams, B. (1985) Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy, London: Fontana Press.

Williams, C. (2007) Transfer in context: Replication and adaptation in knowledge transfer
relationships, Strategic Management Journal, 28(9): 867-89.

Williams, J. and Chesterman, A. (2014) The Map: A Beginner’s Guide to Doing Research in
Translation Studies, London: Routledge.

Wilson, B. (2001) Soft Systems Methodology, Conceptual Model Building and Its Contribution,
West Sussex: Wiley.

Wilss, W. (1982) The Science of Translation: Problems and Methods, Tubingen: Gunter Narr
Verlag.

Wilss, W. (1996) Knowledge and Skills in Translator Behavior, Amsterdam: John Benjamins
Publishing.

Wilss, W. (1998) Decision making in translation. In M. Baker (ed.), Routledge Encyclopedia of
Translation Studies, London: Routledge: 57-60.

Winkless, L. (2022) Sticky—The Secret Science of Surfaces, London: Bloomsbury Sigma.

Winter, S.G. and Szulanski, G. (2001) Replication as strategy, Organization Science, 12(6):
730-43.

Winter, S.G. Szulanski, G., Ringov, D., and Jensen, R.J. (2012) Reproducing knowledge:
Inaccurate replication and failure in franchise organizations, Organization Science, 23(3):

672-85.
Witt, U. (2016) Rethinking Economic Evolution—Essays on Economic Change and its Theory,

Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Witte, H. (1987) Die Kulturkompetenz des Translators: Theoretisch-abstrakter Begriff oder

realisierbares Konzept? TextConText, 2 (2/3): 109-36.

Wollebæk, K. (1989) Medarbeidersamtaler: Hvorfor og Hvordan? (Translated: Development
Dialogue: Why and How?), Oslo: Universitetsforlaget.

Woodsworth, J. (1998) History of translation, Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation Studies,

London/New York: Routledge, 100-6.


298 References

Worthy, J.C. (1950) Organizational structure and employee morale. American Sociologica

Review, 1502): 169-79.
Wright, C. (2019) Thought leaders
management ideas, in A, Sturdy,

and followers. The impact of consultants and advisor. on
S, Heusinkveld, T. Reay, and D. Strang (eds.), The Oxford

Handbook of Management Ideas, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 140-58.
Wu. H.. Gu. X. Zhao, Y, and Liu, W. (2020) Research on the Relationship between Struc.
sural Hole Location, Knowledge Management and Cooperative Innovation Performance in

Artificial Intelligence, Knowledge Management Research & Practice, 1-10. |
Xie, X., Zou, H., and Qi, G. (2018) Knowledge absorptive capacity and enken Performance
in high-tech companies: A multi-mediating analysis, Journal of Business Research, 88: 389.

97, | ltinati
Xu, D., and Shenkar, O. (2002) Institutional distance and the multinational enterprise,

Academy of Management Review, 27(4): 608-18. | | |
Xue, Y., Liang, H., Boulton, WR, and Snyder, C.A. (2005) ERP implementation failures in
China: Case studies with implications for ERP vendors, International Journal of Productioy

Economics, 97(3): 279-95. eT 7

Yanow, D. (2004) Translating local knowledge at organizational peripheries, British Journal of
Management, 15(S1): 9-25.

Yli-Renko, H., Autio, E., and Sapienza, H.). (2001) Social capital, knowledge acquisition, and
knowledge exploitation in young technology-based firms, Strategic Management Journal,
22(6-7): 587-613.

Yuqin Z, et al. (2011) A game between enterprise and employees about the tacit knowledge
transfer and sharing. Paper presented to the international conference on applied physics
and industrial engineering, Physics Procedia, 24: 1789-95.

Zahra, S.A., and George, G. (2002) Absorptive capacity: A review, reconceptualization, and
extension, Academy of Management Review, 27(2): 185-203.

Zaltman, G., Duncan, R., and Holbek, J. (1973) Innovations and organizations. New York: John
Wiley & Sons.

Zander, U., and Kogut, B. (1995) Knowledge and the speed of the transfer and imitation of
organizational capabilities: An empirical test. Organization Science, 6(1): 76-92.

Zeng, J., Liu, Y., Wang, R., and Zhan, P. (2019) Absorptive capacity and regional innovation in
China: An analysis of patent applications, 2000-2015, Applied Spatial Analysis and Policy,
12(4): 1031-49,

Zilber, T.B. (2006) The work of the symbolic in institutional processes: Translations of rational
myths in Israeli high tech, Academy of Management Journal, 49(2): 281-303.

Zou, T., Ertug, G., and George, G. (2018) The capacity to innovate: A meta-analysis of
absorptive capacity, Innovation, 20(2): 87-121.


Index

Note: As most entries refer to either knowledge transfer or translation these terms have been

avoided wherever possible.

absorptive capacity 31-40, 44-45, 591,
58, 123-124, 180, 181, 185-186,
201-202, 206-207

ambiguities of antecedents 32-34
ambiguities of outcomes 38-40
ambiguous contents 35-38

asset versus capability 34-35
dynamic capability 35
interconnectedness 37-38
potential 35-36

realized 35-36

relative 37-38

uncertainties 35-36

absorptive effort 36

absorptive knowledge base 36

absorptive process 36

abstracted skeleton model 99

acceleration of knowledge transfer 58

accidental modifications 166, 248-249

acquisition 37-38, 50-51

actor-network theory (ANT) 75, 90, 97

adaptations 83-84, 148-149, 164, 170-173

contextual 186-187

addition 83-84, 175-176, 177f, 245t, 248

adequacy of translation 81

adherence to source 81-82, 107

adherence to target 81-82, 107

Agarwal, R. 7-8

airline cabin crews (case study) 117-119,
141-143

Alchian, A.A. 166

alteration 83-84, 170, 177f, 245t

hybridization 170
metamorphosis 170
alternative dimensions 36
ambiguities 35-38, 53-54, 56, 57-58
of antecedents 32-34
of outcomes 38-40
see also causal ambiguity
analogies 69-76, 79, 98

causal 73
constitutive 73
heuristic 73

Ansari, S.M. 95-96

Antal, A.B. 125

antecedents 67-99
barriers to translations 84-85
borrowing 74-77
competence 88-90

decontextualization and
contextualization 79-81

domain of translation studies 78-79

generic structure 98-99

individual 33-34

metaphors 70-73

norms 81-83

organizational 33-34, 90-98

rules of translations 83-84

sources to new theories of
organizations 67-69

translator 85-88
appropriateness, logic of 146-147
architecture of knowledge transfers

5-6
Argote, L. 115
Arthur Andersen 'Global Best Practice
Database’ 122-123
Ash, M.K. 126
asset versus capability 34-35
assimilation 35-39
augmentation 173
Austria 125
autonomy 199-200, 203-205
axiomatic knowledge 125

Baden-Fuller, C. 172

balancing acts 200
Bamforth, K 132-133, 139-140, 189-191

Barkhudarov, L.S. 83-84
Barnes, J.A. 40-41


300 Index

barriers 5, 14, 17-19, 76-77b, 99, 178-182,
185, 193-196, 201-205, 207
cultural 193-194, 205-206
geographical distance 47-49, 58, 59%
201-202, 206-207
institutional 193-194, 207
national 193-194, 207
in organizational knowledge transfers 121
to translations 84-85, 1016
see also formal organizational structure
Bartlett, C.A. 28
Bassnett, $. 80-81, 84-85
Bauman, L.J 172-173
Baum, J.A. 7-8
benchmarking 122-124
Berger, P. 145-146
Berkman, U. 94
best practices 122-124
betweenness centrality 43
Bhagat, R.S. 31-32, 50-51
bible translation 78, 86
biculturalism 89-90, 108-109, 117, 220-221
bilingualism 88-90, 108-109, 117, 220-221,
223-225
Blakely, C.H. 10, 158-159
Blau, P.M. 152
blending 72, 99, 105-109
borders 5, 24-25, 27-28, 30-31, 69
see also barriers
borrowing 74-77, 83-84, 148-149
from outer domains 68
generic structure 76-77
horizontal 67-68
saliency of domains 75-76
vertical 67-68
boundaries 178-179
boundary-spanners 31
Bowden, R. 157-158
Brisset, A. 140-14]
British coal-mining industry and knowledge
transfer from United States 131-
133, 137-140, 143-144, 186-191,
204-206, 208t, 248-249
absenteeism 132-133, 189-190
composite work groups 190-191
configuring challenges 190
contextual knowledge, lack of 189-190
handgot system 131, 189-190
isolated dependence 132
learning processes, slow 190-191

longwall method 131-132, 187, 188-199
mechanization 187-188
moral hazard 132-133
productivity, low 132, 190, 204-205
responsible autonomy, loss of 132-133
strikes and stoppages 189-190, 204-295
Buelens, M. 26-27
Bunnell, T. 48-49
Burger King 185-187
Burns, T. 152
Burt, R. 43

Caimo, A. 28-29

Cairncross, F. 48

calque 83-84, 148-149

Caminade, M. 90

Campbell and Cochrane Collaboration 158

Canada 26-27, 139, 194

capability 42

capacity 2-3

Cardinal, L.B. 28-29

Carton, G. 213-214

causal ambiguity 53-54, 111, 112-114,
117-118, 120, 123-124, 141-143

cause-and-effect mechanisms 39, 109-110,
194, 199-200, 203-204, 248
centralization 28-29, 43, 44
chain affiliation 2-3
Chen, C.J. 26-29
China 167, 201-202
copying 156-157, 160-161
and happiness indices 194-197, 202, 204,
206-207, 208t
Shanzhai 156-157, 160-161
chosen or taken for granted rules 159-161
Christensen, T, 30
Ciabuschi, F. 28-29
Cicero 78, 82, 83, 86, 164
clarity 56
closeness 74-75
clusters 47-49
Cochrane, A. 158
Cochrane Database for Systematic
Reviews 158
code-switching 85-86
codification 55-57
Coe, N. 48-49
Coff, R.W. 55-56
cognitive pillar 52
cognitive processes 129, 221-223


cognitive theory 33-34
Cohen, W. 31-3435-36, 38, 39
cohesion 42
combining knowledge of source and
recipient contexts 220-225
bilingualism and biculturalism 220-221
bilingualism as variable 223-225
cognitive processes and
competence 221-223
common causal schema 73
common knowledge 56-57
communication models 76-77
communication technology 48-49
communities of practice (CoPs) 30-31
comparative institutionalism 52
comparison phase 70-71
competence 1, 19, 88-90, 1015, 108-109,
213-215, 221-223, 242-249
contexts and deliberate usage 244-249
modelling knowledge of
contexts 242-244
relational 111-112
substitution 113
technical 35-36
competitive advantage 54-56, 113-114

competitiveness 2, 5

complexity 6-7, 111-114, 119, 120-121,125,

128, 133-136, 141-144
conceptualizations 39, 69, 129-130, 137,

143-144
concrete materialization processes 129

conditional knowledge 109-110, 125

configuration 129-130, 137-140, 143-144,
190

connecting points 43

consequentiality, logic of 146-147

content of imports 69
contexts 98, 149-150, 202, 216-225,

248-249
combining knowledge of source and
recipient contexts 220-225
gaining knowledge 217-220
contextual adaptations 186-187
contextualization 16-19, 76-77, 79-81,
96-98, 101b, 105-106, 109, 129-141,
143-144, 179, 182
configuration of new and existing
practices 137-140
inscribing new practice in target
context 140-141

Index 301

orientation 96-97, 101b
target organizational context 130-137
complexity 133-136
embeddedness 136-137
explicitness 130-133
see also de-contextualization
contextual knowledge, lack of 189-190
contingency theory 67-68
continuous translation 202
coordination challenges 12
copycats 86, 156-157, 160-161, 167-168,
171, 235
copying 155-156, 160-163, 167-168, 171,
177f, 228-234, 245t, 248-249
China 156-157, 160-161
exact 173
copyright 168
Cornelissen, J. 71-7598, 105
creative artist 86
Crudup, A. 168-169
cultural adjustment 125
cultural barriers 207
cultural differences 84
cultural distance 47, 49-52, 58, 59t, 180,
201-202, 206-207
cultural turn 80-82, 97
cultures
national 50-52, 138
reproducing 157-158
Cyert, R.M. 172-173
Czarniawska, B. 9096-97

D'Adderio, L. 172-173
Darbelnet, J. 83-84, 148-149
Darwin, C. 167-168
Davenport 6-7
death of distance 47-49
deceleration 58
decentralization 28-29
decision-maker 87-88
declarative knowledge 109-110, 125
De Clercq, D. 26-27
decoding 14, 76-77
see also contextualization
de-contextualization 16-19, 76-77, 79-81,
96-98, 101b, 107-129, 141-143, 179,

182
airline cabin crews (case study) 117-119
complexity 111-114
embeddedness 114-116


302 Index

de-contextualization (Continued)

explicitness 116-117
Norwegian stockfish production (case

study) 119-121
translatability 110-117
translators 121-129

expatriates 124-125

insiders 126-129

outsiders 122-124
deficient information 7-8
delayering 27-28
deliberate usage 225-242, 244-249

scope conditions 225-234

democracy 3-5, 198, 199

Denmark 95, 201-202
co-production in Aalborg 197-200, 202,

204, 206-207, 208t, 248

descriptive translation studies 78
de-territorialization of closeness 48-49

Dhanaraj, C. 57
differentiation 169
diffusion 90-91, 169

direct knowledge 6
direct transfer 49
dis-embedding 109, 115-116, 122,
141-143
dissimilarity/similarity 138
distance 46-53
cultural 47, 49-52, 58, 59t, 180, 201-202,
206-207
death of 47-49
geographical 47-49, 58, 59t, 180,
201-202, 206-207
high 58
institutional 52-53, 58, 59t, 180, 201-202,
206-207
low 58
national 206-207
physical 49
power distance 50-51
semantic 74-75
distortions to knowledge transfer 113-114
domain-interaction model 71-72, 74,
75-76, 98
domains 78-79
primary 90-91
secondary 90-91
see also external domains
domestication 83, 87-88, 151, 200
Doty, D.H. 152-153

Durand, R. 73-75
Durisin, B. 36-37

Durkheim, E. 152
dyadic level 43-44
dynamic capability 35, 39-40

Easterby-Smith, M. 39-40

Eastern Europe 3-4
economic institutionalism 52

education sector 4-5, 9-10, 94-95, 156-158

effectiveness and efficiency 28-29, 159,
198-199

effortless-ness 117

ego networks 45
embeddedness 98, 114-116, 119, 121,
123-125, 128, 136-137, 141-144,

148-149
high 121, 128
low 128
medium 128
relational 57
emergent meaning 72
emotions 48-49
Empson, L. 30-31
enablers 181-182
encoding 14, 76-77
see also decontextualization
equivalence 81-84, 148-149, 171
connotative 81-82
denotative 81-82
dynamic 81-82
Etzioni, A. 152
European Union 3-5, 26-27
evidence movement, reproducing 158-159
expatriates 124-125, 141-143
experiential learning 248-249
explicitation 117, 175-176
explicit knowledge 54-57, 116-117
explicitness 116-117, 119, 130-133,
141-144
low 121, 132-133
explicitness-tacitness variable 117-121
exploitation 35-38, 70-71
external domains 74-77, 99, 105-108, 145
inspirations from 148-151]
see also organizational translation;
translation studies
externalization 55
external knowledge acquisition 35-36


fashion 169

Faust, K. 40
edelity 158-159, 161, 172-173

high 9-10, 43-44

low 10

versus fit 170-171
Fink, G. 125
frst-to-apply 161
frst-to-invent 161

Ford fabric 131-132, 188-189, 204-205,
208t, 248-249

Fordism 187-188
foreignizing 83, 87-88, 151, 200
foreignness 168-169
formal organizational structure 24-31,
33-34, 59t, 180, 203-204, 206-207
centralization 28-29, 43, 44
decentralization 28-29
formalization 25-27
horizontal differentiation and
integration 29-31

vertical differentiation 27-29
R.H. Forrester 26-27

Foss, N.J. 152
foundational moment 167-168

France 83-85, 194

franchising 7-10, 161-162, 173, 200, 202
franchisee 184-186, 202
franchisor 184-185

see also McDonald's
French/Scandinavian translation school 67,

74,75
Frenkel, M. 94

Ganesh, L.S. 23
generic structure development 72, 76-77

Gentner, D. 69

geographical distance 47-49, 58, 59t, 180,
201-202, 206-207

geographic proximity 48-49

George, G. 35-37

Germany 83-84, 123-125, 164-165, 170,
174-175

Ghoshal, $. 28

Glick, W.H. 152-153

Govindarajan, V. 28-29, 31-32

Granovetter, M. 114

Grayson, C.J. 8

Gupta, A.K, 28-29, 31-32

Index 303

habits and traditions of trans-

lations 148-149, 154,
167-170

Harré, R, 146
healthcare sector 4-5, 8-9, 40-41, 95,

127-128, 139, 158, 172-173
Hedlund, G. 56

Heeley, M. 35-36

Hermans, T, 82

Hofstede, G. 50-51, 231, 232, 240-241

Holmes, J. 78, 220-221

Holz-Månttåri, J. 86-87

Horace 82

horizontal differentiation and
integration 24-25, 27, 29-31

Horvat, D. 39-40

how question 39, 115-116

HRM systems 33-34

Huang, J.W. 26-29

Huet, T. 78

human-technology factor 111-112,
117-118, 141-143
hybridization 31, 170, 177f

Iacocca, L. 126

ideal types 152-155, 163-164, 171

ideas 91-93

images of translator 93-95, 101b

imitation 1-2, 56-57, 113, 155-156,
167-169

implicitation 174

inappropriate transformations of transferred
practices 9-10

incommunicable knowledge 116-117

India 201-202

see also Indo-Norwegian Project (INP)

and Kerala fish industry

indirect transfer 49

individualism/collectivism 50-51

individual well-being and
empowerment 198

Indo-Norwegian Project (INP) and Kerala
fish industry 133-139, 143-144,
200-202, 205-206, 208t

industrial parks 47-48

Ingram, P. 7-8
innovation 1-2, 167-168, 171, 199-200

poles 47-48

potential 198
inscribing 129-130, 140-141, 143-144


304 Index

insiders 126-129
institutional arrangements 138
institutional barriers 193-194, 207
institutional distance 52-53, 58, 59%
201-202, 206-207
institutionalism, organizational 52
instrumental theory 19
Intel Copy EXACT strategy 161-162
intellectual property rights 160-161, 168
interconnectedness 37-38
intercultural communicator 86-87
international joint ventures 57
interorganizational context 114-115
interorganizational diffusion 45-46
interorganizational knowledge transfers 5
interorganizational level 44-45
intra-organizational context 114
intra-organizational diffusion 45-46
intra-organizational knowledge
transfers 35-36
intra-organizational level 44-45
intra-unit channels 30
invention 168
invention/innovation versus
imitation-dichotomy 162
inventors 167
Isaac, G. 157-158
isolated dependence 132
Israel 94

180,

Japan 5-6, 125, 167
copying 160-162
kata institution 160, 162-163
organizational practices of car industry in
United States 26-27, 93

police system imported from
France 164-166, 170

postal system imported from UK 176
public administration 4
reproducing 155-157
subsidiaries in United States 6-7
Jensen, R.J. 200, 233-234
Joerges, B. 96-97
joint ventures 50-51, 57
Jorem, K. 192-193
juxtapositions 106-109

Kaemper, E, 155-156
Kafouros, M. 74
Kedia, B.L. 31-32, 50-51

Kieser, A. 123-124, 214
Klausen, A.M. 134-137, 200-201

knowing how see procedural knowledge
knowing what see declarative knowledge
knowing who knows what see relational]

competence
knowing why and when see conditional

knowledge
knowledge access challenges 12
knowledge-based view (KBV) 23
knowledge characteristics 53-57, 59t, 189

evidence 56-57
knowledge transferability 55-56

knowledge conversation 55
knowledge creation 13, 42

knowledge economy 13
knowledge management 13
knowledge processing routines 37-38

knowledge repository 14
knowledge source 14
knowledge transferability 55-56

Kogut, B. 50-51, 56-57, 112
Kostova, T. 52-53, 227-228, 233-234
Kroc, R. 159-160, 184-186, 202, 207
Krugman, P. 47-48

Kuhn, T. 15
Kumar, J.A. 23

Kwoma people (Papua New
Guinea) 157-158

Lægreid, P. 30
Lane, P.J. 37-39
language differences 84

Larsson, I. 95
Latin America 3-4

Latour, B. 90-91, 93

Lean concept 95

learning processes, slow 190-191

Lefevere, A. 80-81

Leiner, L. 214

leveraging dilemma 25

Levinthal, D, 31-36, 38, 39

Levitt, B. 166

Liao, J. 35-36

Lichtenthaler, U. 39-40

link lengths 45-46

Lippmann, S.A. 53-54, 112-113

literal translation (metaphrase) 81, 83-84;
86, 148-149

Littler, C.R. 27-28

see DS ities th eS ie Vib al Le he bat å PE TE dae ea

a ies

~ BEE Å ES ÅPEN sleek ihe SE ie a ed bh


localization 140, 143-144

Lomi, A. 28-29

longitudinal approach 95, 101b
loose coupling 138, 143-144, 190
lost in translation 174-175, 195
Lubatkin, M. 37-38

Luckmann, T. 145-146

McDonald, D. 184-185

McDonald, M. 184-185

McDonald's 159-160, 184-186, 202,
206-207, 208t

McGrath, J.E. 115
Management by Objectives
(MBO) 140-141, 193

Management by Results 192-193
management characteristics 33-34
Manipulation school 82, 97, 130, 164
man as rule-following agent 146

Mansfield, E. 112
March, J.G. 146-147, 172-173

Marx, K. 152
masculinity/femininity 50-51
Mavor, $. 188-189, 204-205
mediation 6
mediators 5-6, 107
MEDLINE 8-9
Meierewert, S. 125
mergers 30-31
metamorphosis 170, 177f
metaphors 68-77, 79, 98
theory-confirming approach 70-71
theory-generating approach 71-72
theory quality beyond novelty 73
transmission 178-179
meta-studies 158
methodological particularism 95-96
middle management 94-95
Miles, R.E. 152
mimeticism 155-156
Minkov, M. 240-241
Mintzberg, H. 152-153
misfit 138
missing implementation of transferred
knowledge 8-9
modifying mode 17, 154, 170-176, 177f,
182-183, 197-201, 203-206,
238-242, 245t, 248-249
addition 175-176

Index 305

Denmark and co-production

in Aalborg 197-200, 202,
204

failure 200-201
Omission 173-175
Operational translation rules 173
research literature 171-173
similarity 240-242
translatability 238-240
modulation 83-84, 148-149
morale, low 132-133, 162
Moreland, R.L. 115-116
Morgan, G. 70-71, 73

Mortensen, N.M. 197-200, 241-242,
248

Mouricou, P. 213-214

Mowery, D.C. 39

multinational companies (MNCs) and
subsidiaries 2, 28, 30-31, 55-56,
200

Nabokoy, V. 81

national barriers 193-194, 207

national cultures 50-52, 138

national distance 206-207
nation-specific translation styles 148-149

nations, reproducing 155-157
Netherlands 8-9

network(s) 14, 125
centrality 44-45
characteristics 44-46
ego networks 45
network node position 44-45
social relational network: tie
strength 46
whole network effects 45-46
closure 45
constraints 43
density 44-46
node position 44-45
see also social networks
newness 167-169
Nida, E. 81-84
Nielsen, J.A. 95-97
node levels 43
Nonaka, I. 55
non-codified knowledge 49

normative pillar 52
norms of translation 81-83, 88-89, 1015,

107


306 Index

Norway 30, 201-202
Confederation of Business and Industry

(NHO) 165-166, 207
Confederation of Trade Unions

(LO) 165-166, 191-192, 207
coworker dialogue based on American

performance-appraisal and coun-

selling (PAC) system 191-194, 202,

203, 206-207, 2081

Development Dialogue based on —
American performance-appraisal

systems 165-166, 170, 174-175
educational sector 94-95
healthcare sector 127-128, 175-176
public sector organizations 140-141
stockfish production (case study) 40-41,
119-121, 141-143
not-faithful translator 86
Novak, W. 126

novel theories 99
novelty 73, 167, 168-169, 171

incentivizing 168
real 168
universal 168

object image of knowledge 18-19
Oddou, G. 125
O’Dell, C. 8

Olsen, J.P. 146
omission 83-84, 173-175, 177f, 245t

operationalizations 39
operational rules 154, 173, 182-183
opposite rule of radical translation 203
organizational institutionalism 52
organizational responsiveness 35-36
organizational routines 33-34
organizational structure 37-38, 201-202
organizational success 1-3
organizational translation 74, 90-98, 1015,
164
contextualization orientation 96-97
images of translator 93-95
process orientation 95-96
translation objects 92-93
translation as transformation 97-98
Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) 4-5
innovation policy initiatives 47-48
organization and management
(OMT) 67-68

Ortony, A. 75-76, 79; 99
Oswick, C. 67-68, 7]
outbringers 126-127

outcome logics 198
outer domains see external domains

outsiders 122-124, 141-143
(zen, S. 94

Packard, D. 126

paradigmatic theories 69

patents 2, 38, 45-46, 50, 161, 168

patterns of behaviour 148, 151

person-embodied technology 50

Pertusa-Orgega, E.M. 26-27

Phelps, C. 40

physical distance 49

Piekkari, R. 93, 96-97, 220

Polanyi, K. 114

Polanyi, M. 54, 116-117

Popper, K.R. 163

Porter, M.E. 47-48, 152

Portugal 2-3

power distance 50-51

power imbalances 84-85

practice, concept of 109-110

Presley, E. 168-169

primary domain 90-91

principles and templates distinction
172

problem-solving capacity 164-165

procedural knowledge 109-110

process approach 122-123

process-embodied technology 50

process orientation 95-96, 1015,
107-108

process of transfer 76-77), 99
product-embodied technology 50

productivity, low 132-133, 189, 190,
204-205

professional grief-process practice
127-128

propositional theories 69

pro-proximity view 47-48

public administrations 4-5, 63-64, 89, 107,
164-165, 233

Pym, A. 90, 171

quasi objects 91
Quran 85


Radaelli, G. 94-95
eadical translation mode 17, 154, 163-171,
174-175, 177f, 182-183, 191-197,
203, 204, 235-238, 245t, 248-249
accidental translations 166
alteration 170
calculated 164-166

China and happiness indices 194-197,
202, 204

fashion 169
habitual translations 167-169
Norwegian coworker dialogue based
on American performance-
appraisal and counselling (PAC)
system 191-194, 202, 203
novelty and templates for
imitation 168-169
risk avoidance 165-166
similarity 237-238
translatability 235-236
randomized controlled trials 158
Rank Xerox 161-162
Rashman, L. 8
rational calculations 182-183
rationalized knowledge management
system 4-5
Reay, T. 129, 139
recipient organizational context 5
recipient units 76-775, 99
recipient version 175-176
reciprocity 114
recognition 35-36
recontextualization 129
redistribution 114
reformulation 83-84
reframing 16-17
regularities 151
regulative pillar 52
reimagining idea that translators and
translations make a difference 17-19

Reinhnold, S. 152

reinvention 172-173

relational competence 111-112
relational constructs see structural and

relational constructs
relational knowledge 44, 125
relayering 27-28
relevance beyond business
organizations 3-6
architecture of knowledge transfers 5-6

Index 307

renaming 140-14]
repatriates 125
replacement 138-140, 143-144, 190
replication 170-171, 173
replication-adaptation pattern 151, 154
replication dilemma 171-173
replication strategy 159-160, 184-186, 202,
204-205, 207
reproducing-copying translation rule 183,
202
reproducing translation mode 17, 154,
155-163, 167, 177f, 182-191, 205,
228-234, 245t, 248-249
British coal mines and American
Taylorism 186-191, 204-205
chosen or taken for granted rules 159-161
copying 161-163
cultures 157-158
evidence movement 158-159
McDonald’s 184-186, 202
nations 155-157
similarity and copying 230-234
translatability and copying 228-230
reproductions 167, 171
research-based evidence 158
research and development (R&D) 33-35,
37:39
resource mobilization 198
responsible autonomy, loss of 132-133
re-territorialization 140-141
revealing modes and rules 17
revelatory insights 105
Ringov, D.P. 173
risk avoidance 165-166

rule-based complex response 147
rules of translation 83-84, 88-89, 1015, 108,

145-151, 182-183, 202
addition 83-84, 175-176, 177f, 245t, 248
blind application of 147
editing 149-150
explicit 147
external domains 148-151
formal rules 146
informal rules 146
macro level 146
main pattern of outcomes 151
meso level 146
micro level 146

non-matching and inappropriate 147
omission 83-84, 173-175, 177f, 245t


308 Index

rules of translation (Continued)

search for 148

sociology of 148

uncodified 147
see also alteration; copying; deliberate
usage of translation rules

Rumelt, R.P. 53-54, 112-1 13
Ryle, G. 54

Sahlin-Andersson, K. 97; 149-150, 154, 174

Sahlin, K. 95
saliency imbalance of metaphors theory 99

salient features 75-76, 105-107
Sapir, E. 89
Scandinavia 15-16, 90
see also Denmark; Norway; Sweden
Schumpeter, J.A. 47
science parks 47-48
scope conditions 225-234
addition 245t
alteration 245t
copying 245t
modifying mode 238-242, 2451
omission 245t
radical mode 235-238, 245t
recipient and source 227-228
reproducing mode 228-234, 2451
similarity 245t
source 227
translatability 245t

Scott, W.R. 52, 152

search phase 70-71

secondary domain 90-91

Secord, PF. 146

semantic distance 74-75

sensemaking theory 80

sensor capability 41

sequentiality 37, 172-173

Serres, M. 97

Sevön, G. 97

Shannon, C, 11

signal-transmission metaphor 11-13

silos 30

similarity 70-71, 138, 230-234, 245t
and copying 230-234
modifying mode 240-242
radical mode 237-238

- similes 69

Simon, H.A, 147

Simonin, B.L. 56-57

simple models, complex failures 10-13

Singh, H. 50-51

Singh, J. 45-46

Sitton-Kent, L. 94-95

situated knowledge 115

Sjédin, D. 39-40

Skopos theory 82-83, 97, 130, 164

Snell-Hornby, M. 86-87

Snow, C.C. 152

social capital 41-43, 125

social innovations programs 9-10

social mechanism 150

social networks 40-44, 594 58-63, 114,
179-180, 201-204

knowledge-creation capability 42

relational dimension 42

sensor capability 41

social capital 42

storing capability 42

structural dimension 42

transfer capability 42
social relational network: tie strength 46
social relationships and kinships 114

social rule 145
social ties 125, 204-205

sociology of translation 15-16, 90, 97
Song, Y. 36, 38

source entity 99
source organizational context 5

sources to new theories of
organizations 67-69

borrowings from outer domains 68
content of imports 69

source text 81-82

source unit 76-77b

Spain 26-27

specialized translation 89-90

speed of transfer process 8

Spender, J.C. 116-117

spin-out organizations 2-3

stakeholder theory 67-68

Stalker, G.M. 152

standardization 118, 131-132, 160, 184-185

standard operating procedure 147

state of the art 57-63

Stenberg, J-E. 192-193

‘stickiness’ 12-14, 18-19, 63-64, 123-124,

138, 179, 181-182
storing capability 42
strategies 83

ml


ctrategizing 98
etructural elements 44

structural holes 43, 45, 46
«tructural and relational constructs 43-44
| dyadic level 43-44

node level 43

whole network level 44

subject matter 89-90
subprocesses 122-123

substitution 83-84
-ubtraction 83-84, 173-175, 248

success and failures 6-13

success and failures, simple models, complex
failures 10-13

Suddaby, R. 225-226

survival rates 2-3, 5, 52-53, 161-162

Sweden 56-57, 95
research park in Stockholm modelled on

Silicon Valley 149-150, 174
Szulanski, G. 8, 10, 17-18, 172, 178-179,
200, 233-234

tacit knowledge 43-44, 46, 48-49, 54-56,
116-117, 125, 175-176

tacitness 57, 130-131

Tailby, S. 188-189

Taiwan 26-27, 113-114

Takeuchi, H. 55

Tarde, G. 155-156

target organizational context 130-137
complexity 133-136
embeddedness 136-137
explicitness 130-133

Taussig, M. 167-168

Tavares, M.EF. 7-8

taxonomy 152-153

Taylor, F. 188
Taylorism 186-191, 204-206, 208t, 216,

248-249
see also British coal-mining industry and
knowledge transfer from United
States
technical competence 35-36
technological districts 47-48
technological parks 47-48
technology-based practices 112
technopoles 47-48
templates 159-163, 168-169, 173, 174,
184-185, 198, 199-200, 248-249
text-context relationship 79-80

Index 309

theories of knowledge transfers 13-15
theory-confirming approach 70-7]
theory-generating approach 71-72
theory quality beyond novelty 73
Ihuriaux-Alemån, B, 6-7

Tidd, J. 6-7

tie strength 43-44, 46

timing 140-141, 143-144

Todorova, G. 36-37

toning down 173-174, 248

Total Quality Management (TQM) 140-141
Toury, G. 81-83

trained incapacity 147, 204-205
trajectories 248-249
transactive memory 111-112

transactive memory system (TMS)
network 115-116

transfer channels 76-77

transferees as translators 106-107

transfer image of knowledge flow 18-19
transferors 76-77

transformation 35-37, 97-98, 101b

translatability 110-117, 130, 141-144, 245¢
high 128-129

low 121, 125, 128-129, 136

modifying mode 238-240

radical mode 235-236
translation 4, 18-19, 63-64, 181-182
translation ecologies 95
translation mode 17, 154
translation objects 92-93, 101b

translation performance 18-19, 181-187,
202, 205-206

versus transfer barriers 206-207
translation studies 15-16, 67, 74, 98, 101b

translation theory 15-19, 23, 78

see also antecedents of translation theory
translatorial action 86-87
translators 18-19, 85-88, 101b, 121-129,

182-183

expatriates 124-125

insiders 126-129

outsiders 122-124
transmission metaphor 178-179
transposition 83-84, 148-149
trans-specialists 31
Trist, E. 132-133, 139-140, 189-191
trust 30-31, 43, 46, 125
Tsai, W. 28-29, 41, 44-45

Turkey 94


United Kingdom 47; 164-165, 170; 194,

201-202

see also British «oal-mining industry and

fer from United

States
United States 2-3; 8-9, 45-46, 50-51, 57;

112, 125, 161, 200, 201-202

unit of translation 80-81
untranslatability 84-85; 174
cultural 84-85
linguistic 84-85
low 84-85

van Grinsven, M. 98
variation 6-7
ideational 98
structural 98
Veblen, T. 147
Venuti, L. 68
Vermeer, H. 82
vertical differentiation 25, 27-29
vertical structure (hierarchical coordination
system) 24-25
Vinay, J.P. 83-84, 148-149

Volberda, H.W. 32
Von Hippel, E. 179

Walgenbach, P. 174-175

Walton, $. 126

Wanberg, J. 30

Wasserman, S. 40

Weaver, W. 11

weaving 138-139, 143-144, 190

Weber, M. 25-26, 152

Wedlin, L. 95

Wellisz, S. 189

Wellstein, B. 123-124

Westney, D.E. 4, 50, 93, 96-97, 164-]
176, 220

‘what’ question 39

‘where’ question 114-115

Whetten, D.A. 67-68, 74-75, 226

whole network level 44-46

whole theories 69

Willem, A. 26-27

Williams, B. 55

Williams, C. 172-173

Wilss, W. 87-88

Winter, S.G. 7-10, 161-162, 172

wish rotation planning 127-128

Wollebæk, K. 192-194

66,

X factor 14, 181

Zahra, S.A. 35-37
Zander, U. 56-57, 112
Zuni tribe (New Mexico) 157-158


