wer,

ee eee —

AND ASSOCIATES

NILS BRUNSSON, BENGT JACOBSSON

#

met, å — Ev ————— et —" ———gt

— ——=— ===


A World of Standards

NILS BRUNSSON AND BENGT JACOBSSON
AND ASSOCIATES

OG

UNIVERSITETSBIBLIOTEK

OXFORD

UNIVERSITY PRESS


OXFORD

UNIVERSITY PRESS

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford 0x2 6DP ph PR
; ‘< a department of the University of Oxford. |
var omr sr us drar ske A f excellence in research, scholarship,

It furthers the University’s objective of EX rese
and education by publishing worldwide in

Oxford New York

Auckland Bangkok Buenos Aires Cape Town Chennai

: hi Kolkata
Dar es Salaam Delhi Hong Kong Istanbul Karac olkata —
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai Nairobi
Sao Paulo Shanghai Taipel Tokyo Toronto

Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries

Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New

© N. Brunsson and B. Jacobsson, 2000

The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)

First published 2000
Published new as paperback 2002

York

or as expressly permitted by law, or un \ :
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above

You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Brunsson, Nils, 1946-
A world of standards / Nils Brunsson and Bengt Jacobsson and associates.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Standardization. I. Jacobsson, Bengt, 1954- . II. Title.
HD62.B79 2000 389'.6—dc21 00-034016

ISBN 0-19-829693-2 (hbk.)
ISBN 0-19-925695-0 (pbk.)

13579108642

Typeset by Hope Services (Abingdon) Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain
on acid-free paper by
T.J. International Ltd.,
Padstow, Cornwall


During the last few decades students of organizations have demonstrated a strong
Interest in how organizations are affected by general beliefs and rules in the wider
society. Some of these beliefs and rules strongly influence how organizations talk
and often how they act. Many studies have examined how organizations adapt to
beliefs and rules.

We think that it is also important to study how beliefs and rules arise. In partic-
ar many of the underlying processes 1n relation to rules are organizational. Many
rules that become important in society at large are created in and by organizations.
They can at least partly be understood through concepts, theories, and methods of
organization research. The production of rules for others should be an item high
on the agenda of students of organizations.

In this book we discuss standards, in particular how standards are produced and
propagated. Standards constitute a special kind of rule, but a common and very
important one. Most standards are produced by organizations. We argue that stan-
dardization is a fundamental form for governance and co-ordination in societies,
and a form to which social science has paid far too little attention.

In the course of producing this book, we have had the privilege of co-operating
with a number of eminent scholars representing several social science disciplines:
Göran Ahrne, Staffan Furusten, Christina Garsten, Roger Henning, Håkan Hydén,
Kerstin Sahlin-Andersson, and Kristina Tamm Hallström. We have also learnt
much from the participants in the seminar on standardization held in Arild in
September 1997 and from our colleagues at Score. John Meyer gave valuable com-
ments on several chapters. We would like to thank all these colleagues, as well as
all the standardizers who allowed us to interview them, or who helped in other

ways. The Swedish Council for Research in the Humanities and Social Sciences
partially financed this research effort.

ul

Nils Brunsson
Bengt Jacobsson


Contents

Preface V
List of Contributors x
1. The Contemporary Expansion of Standardization |
NILS BRUNSSON AND BENGT JACOBSSON
Standardizers, standards and adopters 2
Perspectives on standardization /
Standardization as regulation 10
Structure of the book 16
Part I Regulating by Standards
2. Organizations, Markets and Standardization PÅ
Nits BRUNSSON
Comparing organization, market and standardization 22
Normative communities 28
Mixed forms 29
Standardization as an alternative 31
Individualization, globalization, and standardization 36
3. Standardization and Expert Knowledge 40
BENGT JACOBSSON
Rules as a store of expert knowledge 41
The scientific bases of standards 43
Standards as technical expert knowledge +4
Expert knowledge, the voluntary nature of standards, and responsibility 46
Standardization, expert knowledge, and the Cartesian heritage 48
4. Standardizing through Organization 50
GÖRAN AHRNE, NILS BRUNSSON, AND CHRISTINA GARSTEN
Introduction 50
Three standard-based organizations 53
The creation of standard-based organizations 54
Recruiting members 59
Dissemination of standards through formal organization 60
Application and modification of standards 62

Standard-based organizations in a globalized world 66


Vill

CONTENTS

Part II Producing and Distributing Standards

5. The Knowledge Base of Standards

6.

STAFFAN FURUSTEN pr
What is ISO 9000 and what does it provide:
pretation of ISO 9000

Assumptions about organization: an inter

Limited academic influence

The strong influence of popular management culture
Why research has not influenced the standard
Organizing the Process of Standardization
KRISTINA TAMM HALLSTROM

A standards organization at work: TC 176

“A catalogue of problems

Different principles of organization
Conflicts between different principles

. Arenas as Standardizers

KERSTIN SAHLIN-ANDERSSON

An arena serving as a standardizer

Standardization by editing

The organization and situation of the standardizer
Standardization: A way for the neutral arena to produce results

. Selling Standards

ROGER HENNING
Standardizers and standards
The problem of persuasion
Arguments for standards

Part III Adopting Standards

9. Following Standards

10.

id.

Nits BRUNSSON AND BENGT JACOBSSON

Following standards by changing practice or presentation
Why follow standards?

How voluntary is the standard?
Standardization and Uniformity
Nits BRUNSSON

Processes that create uniformity
Uniformity and following standards
Achieving uniformity through standards
Standardization and Fashion Trends
Nits BRUNSSON

Fashions and fashion trends

Standardization as the origin of fashion trends
Fashion trends in organizational forms

85
88
93
96
100

101
103
108
111
114

115
117
118

125

+27
130
134
138

138
142
149
151

152
153
155


GONTENTS

Å cropping-up model of organizational forms
Model dynamics
Interaction between reforms and standards
The range of applicability
2. The Pros and Cons of Standardization—An Epilogue
NILS BRUNSSON AND BENGT JACOBSSON
Why standards?
Arguments against standards and standardization

Standardization and the procrustean heritage

Bibliography
Index

LA


List of Contributors

Göran Ahrne is professor of sociology, Stockholm University.
Nils Brunsson is professor of management, Stockholm School of Economics.

Staffan Furusten is research fellow in management, Stockholm School of
Economics.

Christina Garsten is research fellow in social anthropology, Stockholm
University.

Roger Henning is associate professor of political science, Stockholm School of
Economics.

Bengt Jacobsson is professor of public management, Lund University and
Stockholm School of Economics.

Kerstin Sahlin-Andersson is professor of management, Stockholm University.

Kristina Tamm Hallstrém is Ph.D. candidate, Stockholm School of Economics.

All the authors are at the time of writing working at Score, Stockholm Center for
Organizational Research. oe

Acknowledgement

Part of chapter 11 comprises a revised version of the following journal article,
printed with permission from Elsevier Science: Brunsson, N., 1997, ‘The

Standardization of Organizational Forms as a Cropping-up Process’, Scandinavian
Journal of Management, Vol. 13, No. 3, pp. 307-20.


The Contemporary Expansion of
Standardization

Nits BRUNSSON AND BENGT JACOBSSON

There are plenty of people in the modern world who know what is best for every-
one else. Self-appointed experts and pressure groups abound, all with their own
g00d causes and all trying to convince states, corporations, and individuals how
much better off they would be, if only they would follow certain specific rules of
behaviour. There is hardly a field of human activity, from the management of com-
panies to the management of our own health, that does not have its experts and its
pressure groups. TheBundisyof the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF), the
International Womens’ Rights Watch, the International Standards Organization
(ISO), the International Football Association (FIFA), the International Labour
Organization (ILO), OECD and many more cannot perhaps force us to follow
their rules, but they still often manage to get us to do so. Even powerful organiza-
tions like states and large corporations go by rules that others have provided about
how to organize, what policies to pursue, what kind of services to offer, or how to
design their products.

These rules are described as voluntary. They are standards, not mandatory direc-
tives. In modern life standards flourish. Standards may refer to the design and qual-
ities of telephones, how companies should report their financial transactions, how
contracts should be worded, what environmental policies states should pursue, how
organizations should be structured, how children should be brought up and edu-
cated, how tennis should be played, and a host of other matters.

In this book we discuss standards and standardization—the production of stan-

dards—fas a form of! regulation| We argue that standards generate a strong element

a -

of global order in the modern world, such as would be impossible without them.
People and organizations all over the world follow the same standards. Standards

ER and co-operation on a global scale. They create similarity

and homogeneity even among people and organizations far apart from one another.
i

They are instruments of control. Standardization is a form of regulation just as cru-

— a 2 ee LE vel ETE Gem ØP rd JIA re ED OD er

Gral as hierarchies and markets, and relative to which it can be said to be more, or

less, beneficial: it can be seen as involving too much regulation, for example, or too
little, ofnot being s fficiently democratic\pr of leading to undesirable rules. Either

jy: : ØKE ERNNE wer estes
way standardizatioy has important consequences. And yet it seems to have been a

Å
J

i


2 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

much neglected area of social science, attracting far less er pr It deserve.
in view of its importance to society. To understand the modern world, we have to

know a great deal more about standardization. Here, we ee be armene of
aspects of standardization, at how standards are created, an pr å: Clr Conse.
quences are. First we give some examples of standardizers and standards, and of

those who adopt the standards.

Jo då Å

Standardizers, standards, and adopters

~ da DH

ad

se———
ge nr
VIER os pep lew

In moderø nation-states)we are used to seeing the state as the main rule-makiiig
body for a great many people. State legislators possess considerable hierarchies]
authority: they are regarded as having the right to regulate certain matters Within

Waits national borders. In addition, they and the public bodies subsumed under them

YY have access to sanctiong of various kinds, which means that people have a further

incentive to follow their directives.

Standardizers, too, provide rules for the many, but in most other respects they
differ from the nation-state. Standardizers cannot claim hierarchical authority, nor
can -they Gmpose sanctions. They offer standards—which could be described as
- pieces of general advice offered to large numbers of potential adopters. And since
standards are presented as voluntary, standardizers often have to expend consider-
able effort convincing other people that it is in their interest, either now or in the
long term, to accept the standards.

Most standardizers are private sector organizations or private persons. They are
particularly common and important on the global stage, where they meet less com-
petition from other rule setters; there is no world state with legislative power.

Many organizations refer to themselves as standard setters. Standards organiza-
tions such as the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the Association
Francaise de Normalisation (AFNOR), the British Standards Institution (BSI), and
Deutsches Institut fiir Normung (DIN) were founded in the first decades of the
twentieth century. Their importance in providing standards has diminished, how-
ever, as the importance of the international standards organizations has increased.
CEN (Comité Européen de Normalisation), ETS] (European Telecommunica-
tions Standards Institute), and ISO (International Organization for Standardization)
are examples of international standard-setting organizations, most of them founded
Just after the Second World War. They are private organizations, their major activ-

ities being financed by companies that belong to committees for developing stan-
dards of various kinds. These organizations develop standards for the way things
should be named and for the qualities that various products should possess. Within

the last few decades ISO has also begun en Sos rds for administrative
O

processes, such as the series of standards called IS OOO. _

PE å

There are also a great many other international non-governmental organizations
(INGOs) that issue standards, for Instance organizations such as the International
Handball Association, the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) and the
International Committee on Bird Protection (ICBP). These organizations issue


THE CONTEMPORARY EXPANSION OF STANDARDIZATION J

standards on such diverse subjects as how handball should be played, how adver-
tisements should be designed, and how threatened bird species should be protected.
Large corporations Operating in a global market sometimes co-operate in creating
standards applying to their particular line of business.

A number of less well-organized actors also issue standards. In the administrative
field there is no dearth of consultants or other people writing books or articles for
the media on how firms should be organized or how marketing should be con-
ducted. Books on the best way to run our lives belong to the same kind of publi-
cation, at TOMO. ad Jan

Academic researchers and scientists are often actiVe standardizers: a conspicuous
number of economists have felt called upon to adVocate standards for the way gov-
ernments should manage their economies. poy sear 1994). In a similar manner
students of government,-either at their own behest or that of others, have created
standards for how democracy should be maintained and safeguarded. In the field of
management research there is also a long tradition of providing prescriptions for the
Way Organizational matters can best be dealt with.

Although these standardizing organizations or people are not themselves public
bodies, many of them have close contact with such bodies at the national or inter-
national level. Rather than being controlled by states, many standardizers want to
influence and control state policies (Sassen 1998; Hirst and Thompson 1996). A
variety of women’s organizations try to influence social and labour policies, envi-
ronmental organizations try to establish and influence environmental policies, and
so on. Many of these standardizers are also highly successful.

—/> But not all standardizers are private. The governments of various countries also ee N

issue standards, The law often contains many optional elements (Hydén 1997).
Laws pertaining to purchasing or the drawing up of contracts, for instance, contain
certain rules that those involved can adopt or not, at will. Such optional laws rep-
resent standards in our sense of the word. Similarly, various public agencies may
not just issue directives within their particular area of responsibility, but also assume
the role of friendly experts and provide general advice to other public bodies or to
citizens and private organizations. In this way they become standardizers.

Various international governmental organizations such as the United Nations,

OECD, UNESCO, or the European Union, which have sovereign states as their
members but often lack enough authority to issue binding directives, create a great
number of standards instead. They issue huge numbers of recommendations, white
books and the like—what is sometimes called soft law. The increasing importance
of such standards compared with directives, has produced a kind of ‘neo-
voluntarism’ (Streeck 1996): the capacity of the EU to impose binding obligations
is low, and various voluntaristic approaches are used instead. In addition to pro-
ducing standards itself, the EU has actively delegated much rule making to various
standards organizations: instead of issuing directives for a particular area, it often
refers to existing standards or suggests that new standards be developed (Jacobsson

1993; Bundgard-Pedersen 1997).


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

Standards

However much such organizations and individuals we an ee One another,
they all issue standards. On a general and abstract level, Fv - S vorte rules
about what those who adopt them should do, even if this only oe Ves saying
something or designating something 1n a particular way. ge speci ard three
types of standards can be distinguished: standards about being something, about

doing something, or about having something. | pil
Standards about being something classify things or actors 1n a standardized Way,

There are standards telling us what a telephone or a facsimile machine is.
Classificatory standards include standards for measuring, such as the metric system
or the Celsius temperature scale. Scientific classifications are also standards for what

certain things are, ranging from the Linnaean system for classifying plants to Sys-
tems in the information technology field. Statistical standards prescribe how to

measure a country’s gross national product, its unemployment rates, or pollution of
various kinds. There are general and technical dictionaries that set standards for

what words and technical terms mean and for how they are spelled.

Standards for what we do

There are many standards applying to what we do, in the narrow sense of the word.
For centuries books have been written on etiquette, on the conventional rules of
individual behaviour in social contexts (Elias 1939). Many people also claim to
know how organizations should behave. There are standards regarding the service
that organizations offer to their customers or clients, standards saying what should
be included in different types of educational programme, and standards for what
states should do about their financial problems. Other standards specify the design
of the products that a company can manufacture and offer for sale- there are stan-
dards for building materials, paper of various formats, loading pallets for storage and
transport, or the requirements that potatoes or telephones should fulfil.

Standards can also apply to various processes—the production process for
instance—within an organization. They may pertain to the effects of production
on the external environment or the internal work environment. Or they may con-
cern the processes for the planning and control of the production process. These
last are one example of the administrative standards that are legion today: they
include standards that describe how leadership should be exercised, how organiza-
tional processes should be designed and controlled, and how accounting should be
conducted.

Many standards are primarily concerned with procedures and_presentations
rather than with production, products, or the effects of these. A number of stan-
dards concerning the work environment refer not to the work environment itself,
but to the plans and procedures organizations should develop for dealing with
related issues (Jacobsson 1993). Quality standards refer not to the quality actually
achieved, but to the types of administrative processes that are supposed to lead to


ST

THE CONTEMPORARY EXPANSION OF STANDARDIZATION

high quality (see Chapter 8). Standards referring to the requirements a product
should fulfil in order to be safe are being abandoned in favour of standards for the
routines that the producer should employ for testing the products.

Standards for what we have

Standards can also refer to things we should have. People are advised to have a plan
for their careers. A modern state is subject to standards, designed by various UN
bodies or by OECD, for example, about the need to have democracy, a constitu-
tion, an educational system, or unemployment statistics. According to some stan-
dardizers, companies or government agencies should have clear goals and

departments for personnel questions (where personnel should preferably be
referred to as human resources)

There is a steady increase in the number of standards regarding what organiza-
tions should have. A university department, for instance, should have a strategic
plan, equal-opportunity groups, a quality system, and course evaluations. Such
structures have emerged from a multiplicity of standards and standardizers, ranging
from women’s organizations to management gurus. Various other INGOs also pro-
pose and support structural elements for states, which should thus provide them-
selves with both agencies and policies for such things as research, administration,
employment, and so on.

But standards do not necessarily refer to things we should have; they can also
refer to persons—to those with certain qualifications, knowledge, or skills.
Organizations should, for example, hire both chartered accountants and certified
translators.

What we have may not necessarily entail what we do. Organizations may have
strategic plans without planning strategically, or plans for job equality without these
affecting equality as such, or quality systems without altering the quality of the rel-
evant activities. States can have research policy programmes without any research
being conducted (Finnemore 1996), or administrative policy programmes without
any particular administrative policy being pursued.

Sometimes, however, it becomes necessary to show that we are doing what we
say we are. Organizations may want to obtain certification for their processes and
products from some certifying body, which is supposed to check on whether orga-
nizations actually live up to the standards to which they allegedly subscribe. Not all
certification, however, involves a direct check on what the organization does, of
what it produces, or of its results—all aspects that are of interest to the outside
world. Instead it may simply be a matter of checking that the organization has some
regulatory or documentation system which 1s believed to produce good results.
Prizes for ‘best quality’ are conferred not upon those companies whose products are
of the highest quality, but upon those which are considered to have the best
processes in terms of management, leadership, and working organization (see

Chapter 8).


6 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

Adopters of standards

Standardization is based on the hope that some organizations or eeeerarties
adhere to the standards concerned, or will at least consider doing so. Standardizers

have no role unless there are people who adopt their standards. Standardizers’ more

specific reasons for needing adopters, and the kind of adopters that are most impor-
tant to them, will vary from one standard maker to the next. Some er
such as management gurus, make money out of their standards and related activi-

ties. They need buyers. |

Other standardizers want to improve and reform what they see as important
aspects of life; they want to change others, and so they need to reach these others.
Most standardizers lack the resources, authority, or power necessary to achieve any
actual changes in the behaviour of others by their own direct efforts. Consequently
they need intermediaries, some more powerful agent—often a state or a large cor-
poration—to do the job for them, and their own efforts are directed mainly
towards these. States may be persuaded to change their legislation to comply with
a standard. Corporations may be persuaded to make a certain standard a binding
rule within their own organization or to require their suppliers to follow a certain
standard. Or standardizers may succeed in convincing public opinion that a certain
standard is highly justified, and this may compel states and corporations to follow
it.

Still other standardizers develop standards that they themselves are going to
adopt, but they are dependent on others also adopting them. Industrial companies
are often interested in establishing certain product standards in their own line of
products, if they can get others to do so too.

Regardless of who the adopters may be, it is necessary that they can in fact act in
accordance with the standards. They must also have the freedom to choose. If they
do not have that freedom, or if they are compelled to comply, then the standard-
izers have no immediate interest in trying to influence them. In other words, stan-
dardization presupposes an ability on the part of the adopter to act independently.
In the social sciences entities that have this ability are often referred to as actors. An
actor 1s a separate and distinguishable entity with definite boundaries, enjoying a
certain degree of independence, and possessing resources of its own (Meyer and
Jepperson 1996). There are two types of actor in the modern world: individuals and
organizations (including states), and it is at these actors that standards are aimed.

The compass of standardization

The reader may wonder at this point how much can be included in the concept of
standardization. We have covered a fairly extensive area of the social landscape,
indicating a wide range of actors either issuing standards or adopting them. Many
rules and types of advice—although by no means all—can be described as standards.
Is our conception of standards perhaps too comprehensive? We would argue that,
at least for the purposes of this book, the broad sweep of our definition is justified.

ee ae eee grey ———= —


THE CONTEMPORARY EXPANSION OF STANDARDIZATION /

Standards and standardizers come in a vast range of types, but we feel it would be
an unfortunate decision to limit ourselves from the start to certain kinds only. They
also have much in common and it is on these shared aspects that this book focuses.

The fact that standardization apparently encompasses much, seems to us to indicate
its extreme pervasiveness in modern society.

Perspectives on standardization

In light of the abundance and importance of standards, standardization might be
regarded as an underdeveloped area in the social sciences, at least compared with
other forms of regulation, such as markets and organization. However, it has not
been completely neglected. Several branches of social science have addressed vari-
Ous aspects of standardization, or have at least touched upon the subject.

In economics, standards have been considered largely in connection with the
pros and cons of markets or formal organizations. An established way of doing
things can emerge as a result of market processes or it can be suggested by stan-
dardization bodies or by the state. When there are interdependencies between con-

sumers of a product, market processes may lead to suboptimal technical solutions
due to ‘lock-in processes’. Ifsome people start using PCs, it may be difficult for one
of them, wanting to use a better technical solution, such as the MacIntosh com-
puter, actually to do so, since all the computers need to be able to interact. In such
cases 1t may be wise to make a rule instead, prescribing the best technical solution.
In practice, such rules often come in the form of standards.

The mixture of markets and organization has also been discussed by students of
globalization and internationalization. For example, studies have been made of
ways of regulating global markets in the absence of an authoritative body at the
world level. The emergence and development of international regimes, such as the
Bretton Woods Agreement and the GATT have often been studied as a kind of
governance without government. Regimes have been seen as ‘sets of governing
arrangements that include ‘networks of rules, norms, and procedures that regular-
ize behavior and control its effects’ (Keohane and Nye 1977) and as ‘sets of implicit
or explicit principles, norms, rules, and decision-making procedures around which
actors expectations converge in a given area of international relations’ (Krasner
1983). Such regimes contain many standards. These standards will not necessarily
always be fully consistent with each other or with other aspects of a regime, that is,
it is far from certain that all aspects will in fact ‘converge’. It is therefore important
to study standards and the other aspects separately, as well as in combination.

How rules are created and implemented in organizations has been a classical
theme in organization studies. The main focus has been on rules issued by the lead-
ership of an organization. Over the last few decades, however, this theorizing has
begun to follow new paths. Researchers are now giving greater weight to the fact
that organizations are embedded in society, which makes them susceptible to rules
that come from their environment rather than from their own management.
Studies are undertaken of how organizations are affected by institutions, by ideas,


. A WORLD OF STANDARDS
(

: en for grante
rules, and legitimate patterns of action that are generally tak granted (Meyer

| | 1983) ).
, (1¢ d DiMaggio and Powell ( | :
PE er pur used to describe ideas and patterns of action as well
ns '

as formal rules (Jepperson 1991). Some standards pg the
sense that, in practice, actors take it for granted tha 7 ard owed.
However, there are also many ideas, patterns of action, and r ne ern Soci-
eties that actors do not necessarily take for granted, in other words that are not ingti-

tutionalized. Most standards belong to this category. Even rig such clements in
the environment do not fully determine what we should do 1n a given situation,

they can still be important since many actors may choose to act in accordance with
nel may not explain as much of individual and organizational behaviour
as institutions do. The mere existence of a standard does not guarantee that it wil]
be followed either by individuals or by organizations. To understand what happens
to standards, we obviously have to examine specific situations and details of the
reception processes involved. at iG

There has been growing interest in how organizations receive ideas and models
that arise and then spread round the world (Powell and DiMaggio 1991.
Czarniawska and Sevon 1996; Rovik 1998). We know a considerable amount about
how such ideas and models spread, and what happens as organizations try to trans-
late them, adjust to them, and implement them. The focus has often been on change
processes 1n certain sectors of society or in organizational fields, that is, among orga-
nizations that ‘constitute a recognized area of institutional life: key suppliers,
resource and product consumers, regulatory agencies, and other organizations that
produce similar services or products’ (DiMaggio and Powell 1983. p. 148).

According to the above definition, standardizers are also part of some organiza-
tional field. The financial accounting field consists not only of companies that pro-
duce accounts but also of organizations like parliaments and governments,
international standards organizations, the European Union, and so on, that create
and issue rules. Some of these regulators lay down rules that are binding, while oth-
ers work with standards. Although standardizers and other rule setters have been
seen as part of organizational fields, more interest has been paid to the way specific
actors adapt to rules than to how the rules are created. In this book we look not
only at the adoption of standards, but also—and primarily—at their production.

But who are these self-appointed experts who do not act themselves, but who
seek to create rules for others to follow? In an attempt to classify these ‘others’,
Meyer (1996) singled out successful organizations perceived as models for other
organizations, associations of organizations (for instance INGOs), social move-
ments, science, and the various professions, and he recognized—as we do—the
importance of these creators and transmitters of models and ideas, and of trying to
discover the kind of attributes that tend to enhance the potential of such ideas for
travel.

Compared with Meyer (1996) and Czarniawska and Sevön (1996), we focus
more narrowly here on standards and standardizers. Standards are related to other


THE CONTEMPORARY EXPANSION OF STANDARDIZATION 9

ideas and rules, but they have characteristics requiring special attention. Standards
possess some qualities that can affect the ease with which they travel between and
within organizations and organizational fields: they consist of explicit statements
and they are presented as being voluntary.

Naturally, we do not regard standardization as a field that can be cheerfully left
to technicians and engineers. We have already seen just how many people are
engaged in standardization activities apart from those who, like standards organiza-
tions, actually call themselves standardizers. But the product standards set by these
organizations also deserve more extensive interest on the part of the social sciences.
Some case studies have already been conducted of the development of standards for
a variety of products, such as colour televisions, video recorders, electricity-pro-
duction systems, or telephone systems. The fundamental task, according to these
studies, has been to create some kind of compatibility between the different parts
of a system: for instance, what is needed for people to be able to take a train from
Paris to London, in terms of tracks, timetables, signal systems, and so on.

Historical studies of technological development such as those of the struggles
between Edison and Westinghouse (‘the battle of the systems’), or between differ-
ent standards for colour television, or of the triumph of the qwerty keyboard
(David 1986) show that standards sometimes evolve gradually in the interplay
between companies, public organizations, and standardizers on the one hand, and
more market-driven processes on the other (Hughes 1987; Schmidt and Werle
1998).

In this literature the proliferation of standards is often explained in terms of new
needs. Globalization, for instance, creates an increase in the demand for world-
wide standards. The studies also show that the creation of standards can seldom be
seen as a natural, straightforward or harmonious process. Rather, many factors are
important: which actors are able to participate or allowed to do so, how the deci-
sion processes are designed, and so on, Although the standards involved are often
called ‘technical’, they are constructed in processes that appear to be anything but
technical (Guillet de Monthoux 1981; Schmidt and Werle 1998). Technological
development is not linear, nor does it automatically mean that the best standard
wins (Pinch and Bijker 1984; Hawkins, Mansell, and Skea 1995).

Standardization and standards have also been seen as a question of strategy
(Grindley 1995). Standards can be strategically important to individual actors such
as manufacturing firms, for which the standardization of products and production
processes is often a vital matter. A company may be very eager for its own partic-
ular solution to be accepted as the general standard: if it succeeds, it will have a great

advantage over its competitiors in the market-place; if it fails, it will have to make
costly and time-consuming changes to its products. Not surprisingly, companies are
often ready to invest considerable effort in standardization processes.

Large industrial corporations are often participants in committees for product
standardization. Individual companies try to get approval for standards that are
desirable for themselves or to prevent any standards at all being accepted in certain
areas. The resources available for participating in standardization committees of this


10 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

| . » which small _
kind represent a decisive strategic advantage, and one wh companies do

‘watt ct and even increaea 4
not usually possess. In such cases standardization may refle N Increase dif.

ifferent sizes.
ferences in the power possessed by firms of diff Je
Also, for a large company seeking to introduce a new p » Standardization

, he compa |
can be an important means to success—if, for example, t pany can use jt.

influence to get a standard adopted that will favour the use of its own product, such

as a standard saying that the company '$ type of product should be a component of

certain other products. Even if other companies try to introduce similar Products

that comply with this standard, they may find it difficult to reduce the lead that the
first company has achieved. In this way, a standard can provide a far more effective

method of ensuring sales than acquiring a patent or launching a marketing cam-

paign would have done. | |
Suppose, for example, that a company invents a NEW safety device for use in cars.

Although a patent would ensure the company’s position as the sole manufacturer
of the device, it would by no means guarantee good sales. To establish a market for
it the company would have to convince customers that they needed such a prod-
uct. Although doing this is a traditional way of creating a market for a product, and
one that is described in detail in the marketing literature, it also obviously requires
ample resources, and the results can be very uncertain. Hence, it may well be more
effective to set about establishing a standardizing committee for the relevant type
of product, perhaps within CEN or ISO. This can result in the safety device
becoming the standard for cars in general, suddenly providing the company with
an enormous market as well as a clear lead over its competitors.

Standardization as regulation

In this book, we address the topic of standards and standardization as part of a wider
discussion of regulation. To regulate is, in our view, to create and propagate rules.
We do not view regulation as something narrow and largely technical, although
some standardizers would have us believe that it is. On the contrary, regulation
should be seen as rule-making in a broad sense, as a form of organized governance.
Standardizers and standards are more important than is often thought by students
of society, and even by those who claim to be standardizers themselves. We believe
that considerations regarding the significance and effects of standards should be
related to the broader issue of the significance and effects of rules generally. The
alternative to standards is seldom a situation without rules; rather, it is a situation in
which rules other than standards obtain. It will thus be interesting to investigate

how, compared to other rules, standards are produced and supplied, as well as how
they are received.

Viewed as a form of regulation standardization is a core aspect of society. Society
is possible because there is a certain degree of regularity in people’s actions. People
behave and can be expected by others to behave, in specific ways in certain situa-

tions, and these expectations are generally met. Social processes become pre-
dictable. Not only do we know what to do in most situations, but we also think


THE CONTEMPORARY EXPANSION OF STANDARDIZATION 11

we know what others will do and we can therefore adapt to their actions 1n
advance. We do not need to wait until after they have acted. There is less need for
information about specific cases. Co-ordination and co-operation are facilitated.

Regularity may be interpreted as the result of people following rules—rules that
are more or less explicit, written or unwritten, and more or less consciously con-
sidered before or after the relevant action. A rule tells us what to do in certain sit-
uations. It indicates what is appropriate or permitted or, in negative terms, what we
should not do. Rules are conceived as applying on more than one occasion, and
most rules apply to more than one person. Rules are essential to provide social order
and to prevent anomie or anarchy (Durkheim 1906; Parsons 1937; Coleman 1990).

When we follow rules we are displaying a specific kind of intelligence. Different
rules apply to different people and different situations. So, explicitly or implicitly,
we have to answer three questions in order to know which rule to follow (March
and Olsen 1989): Who am I? What sort of situation am I in? What is appropriate
for a person like myself to do in a situation like this? In other words, we must define
ourselves and the situation, deciding on the category under which we, and the sit-
uation, should be subsumed.

This is a different type of logic than the logic we use when employing other
kinds of intelligence. It has often been contrasted with intentionality and rational-
ity, to the idea that it is our intentions and our assessment of the future that steer
our actions. The questions to be answered then are the following: What will I like
or prefer in the future? What action alternatives are open to me? What would be
the future consequences of each of these alternatives? The consequences of which
alternative will best fit my future wishes and preferences? If we ask and answer all
these questions properly, we can also be said to be rational. But while the logic of
intentions and rationality looks ahead at what will occur, the logic of following
rules is based on history and on something that already exists, namely rules.

The following of rules can also be compared with other forms of intelligence
such as imitation and learning. Imitating means basing our actions on what we
think others have done, said, or thought. Learning means making experiments: we
act first and think later; we repeat actions whose outcomes we like, or try new ones
when we do not like the outcomes of our previous attempts. In practice all these
forms of intelligence need not exclude all the others. We may follow a rule that
says people should be rational. Or we may choose to follow the rules that we feel
best fulfil our intentions and preferences. We might imitate others by following the
same rule that they do, or we might follow various rules experimentally to see
which we like best.

Rules are directed towards social actors, individuals or organizations of various
kinds, such as associations, companies, or states. We are confronted daily with a
plethora of rules. Much of what we do, in fact, can be interpreted as the following
of rules. Rules guide our getting to work at 9.00 a.m., stopping at red lights when
we are cycling to work, greeting our colleagues when we get there, as well as the
way we perform most other activities at our place of work. Since rules can co-
ordinate activities they tend to abound wherever activities occur, the co-ordination


12 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

—

» > = | fA 4
f which is important. Traffic flows much better, for example, if there is rule

| ich side d to drive on.
telling us which side of the roa waits | a

Since the co-ordination of activities 1s important in Ge would
say it is their very raison d’étre—tt 1s essential that rules obtain there (Weber 1964

ch. 1) . Organizations such as our modern industrial firms or our nation-states are.

after all. at least sometimes very efficient and effective actors. And state legislation

can have important co-ordinative effects in society. Rules are Me important in
markets, where they concern such essentials as ownership rights, the drawing up of
9»

contracts, and the role of money. as
Some rules gain easy acceptance, on the grounds of the co-ordination that cap

benefit us all. Other rules can be appreciated because they prescribe behaviour that
we think is morally correct or that would favour ourselves. Other rules may be per-

ceived as expressions of inequality in power: some have the power to set rules for
others and to see that the rules are followed, without the followers necessarily see-

ing the rules as moral, justified, useful, or in their interests.

Norms, directives, and standards

Standards represent a specific type of rule alongside two other types, namely norms
and directives. Most rules are social norms that we rarely find in written form but
that we have learnt to accept as natural in the society we to which we belong
(Durkheim 1906; Coleman 1990). Norms are internalized rules that we can follow
without having to reflect on them. Of the three types of rule, norms can be seen
as the most self-evident and least problematic, both for those who follow them and
for those who see them being followed, at least if both parties belong to the same
culture. Attention is seldom drawn to norms, except when someone is violating
them. That we should not steal, and that we should help one another in various sit-
uations, are two examples of norms. Social norms have no obvious source, appear-
ing instead to be a part of us. Norms are compelling, in the sense that it is difficult
to violate them; and they are voluntary, in the sense that we appear to be follow-
ing them because we want to, and not because we are exposed to any outside pres-
sure to do so.

Then there are other more explicit rules, this time generally in written form.
Many such rules are issued by persons or organizations to whom we have given, or
been forced to give, the formal authority to create rules for us and for others. These
rule setters are often able to combine their rules with sanctions, that is, to punish

those who do not obey them and, perhaps, rewarding those who do. The rules are

mandatory. Here, we refer to such rules as directives. It is not uncommon for direc-
tives to be justified on the grounds that the

who are supposed to follow them.

An organization contains a centre with the author
1964, ch. 1). The

y are good for others apart from those

ty to issue directives (Weber
leadership of a formal organization has a mandate to issue even

quite detailed directives about what the organization members should or should
not do. The members are often individual people, such as the employees of a com-

|


THE CONTEMPORARY EXPANSION OF STANDARDIZATION 13

pany or public agency, the members of an association, or the citizens of a state. But
organizations, too, can be members of other organizations. Companies can belong
to a trade association or they can form a cartel. States can belong to international
government organizations such as the UN or the EU. Membership of an organi-
zation is generally voluntary (states being one exception), but once one 1s a mem-
ber one has to follow the directives of the leadership. Members of an organization
have to give up some part of their right to decide for themselves.

Standards are explicit rules issued without reference to the kind of authority that
the leaders of organizations enjoy. Individuals can issue standards for others, and
organizations can issue standards for others apart from their own members.
Sometimes the leadership of an organization may choose not to exploit its formal
authority when it issues rules, thus issuing standards rather than directives. Those
who issue standards are unable or unwilling to make others follow them, at least
not by exploiting any formal authority they may possess.

Standards resemble directives in two ways that distinguish them from norms:
they are explicit and they have an evident source. They also differ from directives,
however, in that they are claimed to be voluntary. The standardizers do not have
access to sanctions against those who do not comply with their standards. Whether
or not a standard is adhered to depends primarily not on the hierarchical authority
or power of the issuing source, but on whether the standard appeals to the adopters
for other reasons. Standards can be said to provide a kind of recipe or advice for
many others regarding what they should do. Since standardizers present their stan-
dards as voluntary, they cannot be sure that anybody will in fact follow them. They
must convince potential adopters that they would benefit from following the stan-

dards.

Complex standards

In reality it is not particularly easy, and not always necessary, to distinguish between
our three types of rule. The same content can appear in norms, directives, and stan-
dards. That we should not steal is both a social norm and a directive included in
our criminal law. That we should sometimes greet each other by shaking hands is
a norm, as well as a standard recommended in books on etiquette. The way in
which organizations are to report their economic transactions is regulated by
national law as well as by international standards. Moreover, rules may turn up in
various guises in different social settings. A certain content may turn up as a norm
in some settings and as a directive or a standard in others. Certain groups of people,
for example, may embrace norms for behaving in an environmentally ‘sound’ way;
at the same time there are also many environmental standards intended for indi-
viduals and organizations; and again, many industrial firms issue environmentally
driven directives as to how their employees should act, for example in handling
hazardous material. And something that is a standard in society at large becomes a
directive for the members of an organization whose management has decided that
the organization is to follow the standard. A standard clause used in an agreement


14 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

form, perhaps between a buyer and a seller, becomes a directive for the parties to
the agreement. mes

In the course of time an existing rule may become a directive, a norm, and 4
standard. Legislation based on existing norms can also affect ome Ørn Standards
can be created as specifications of social norms. When states deregulate abolishing
some of their directives, ideas similar to those inherent in the directives may turn
up in standards. |

Standards can also give rise to norms or directives. Standardizers may note a
strong need for a standard where there is no similar norm or directive, but if they
are very successful the content of their new standard may ultimately become 4
social norm or a directive. Once that has happened the standard loses its impor-
tance, and the standardizers can concentrate on constructing new standards. But the
initial standard has certainly shown its power. Using a fork to eat with was an
important standard in sixteenth-century etiquette books (Elias 1939, ch. 2), but it
is now such a powerful social norm in most of Europe that it no longer calls for
specific mention in such books. Management by objectives, which was a popular
standard for organizations some time ago, has now been incorporated as a directive
into Swedish national legislation about local government, and quality standards
have been incorporated into the legislation about health care. Management con-
sultants selling models based on these ideas can now refer to the mandatory direc-
tives, rather than to the weaker standards that preceded them.

Finally the characteristics of a directive, a norm, or a standard can vary in prac-
tice: directives vary in their imperative force, norms in how thoroughly they have
been internalized, and standards in how voluntary they are.

For all these reasons we prefer to leave our exact definition of standards fairly
open, regarding some of the main characteristics of both standards and standardiz-
ers as variables rather than constants. Standards can vary In many respects. Even
though standardizers cannot compel people to follow their standards, other parties
may do this for them. The extent to which standards agree with established norms
and present-day practice can also vary considerably. The standardizers vary in the
resources available to them for spreading their message, and in the extent to which
people accept them as standardizers. In Chapter 4 of the book we discuss some
aspects of the boundary between standards and directives, and in Chapter 11 we
provide some examples of the boundary between standards and norms.

Related meanings of standard

There are other meanings of the terms standard and standardization than the ones
we use. The terms evoke the idea of similarity and uniformity: what is standardized
is supposed to be similar. This connotation of standardization has its Origin in the
rule aspect of standards: following a rule implies doing similar things on similar

occasions, thus producing uniformity across time. When rules apply to many
actors, as standards do, these actors will tend to behave in a similar way, producing

uniformity across space. Items that are uniform due to standards are described as


THE CONTEMPORARY EXPANSION OF STANDARDIZATION |

Ji

‘standardized’, but one does not use the term standardized to describe the natural
world, as this is not supposed to be under human rules: screws and behaviour are
said to be standardized, but not flowers and mountains, however similar these may
be.

Rules also specify what is proper behaviour, and ideas of appropriateness thus
become associated with standardization; the standard way of doing things is often

understood not only as the most usual way, but also as the generally accepted, nor-
mal, and even best way.

In this book we define standards as specific kinds of rules and standardization as
the production of such rules, but we will also examine the two other connotations
of standards and standardization described above: more specifically, we will ques-
tion the notion that standardization always leads to uniformity and that standards
are, or should be, accepted as defining appropriate behaviour.

Finally, it is worth noting that there are also standards for what a standard is. The
following is ISO’s standard for what a standard is:

A document, established by consensus and approved by a recognized body, that provides,
for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for activities or their results,

aimed at the achievement of the optimum degree of order in a given context (SS—EN
45020 1999).

Fortunately, since this definition is a standard, its acceptance is voluntary. But we
agree that it succeeds in capturing a number of the essential characteristics of stan-
dards. We have just one objection to it, however: we must emphasize that there
are a great many more bodies issuing standards besides those that are ‘recognized’.

Controversial standards

Whether we like it or not, standardization has had a dramatic influence on the way
our modern society functions. Although some individual standards have little
impact, the enormous and ever-growing total number of all standards certainly
does. Thus a proper understanding of standardization is a prerequisite for under-
standing the way modern society functions.

Of course it could be said that some standards tend to reflect common norms and
practices, and are not therefore of any great importance. But in the case of many
standards, this is at most only partly true: a strong element of innovation may also
be involved. Besides, the fact that a norm or a practice is formulated as a standard
is not without its implications. For instance, a standard can be expected to spread
more easily than a norm or a practice. Norms spread by socialization processes that
often take a long time and require very special conditions to occur at all, and prac-
tice among other people or in other organizations is often difficult to observe.
Successful standards can also have an inhibiting effect on innovation, perhaps
diminishing the effect of subsequent standards. A particularly successful standard
may freeze developments into a fixed form that is difficult to change, even with the

help of new standards.


I A WORLD OF STANDARDS
)

an that they are beneficial or that Stan.
- On the one hand, standardizers tend
on and communication. Standards are

r å > » : {1

‘cue th: cilitate co-ordina | |

to argue that standards fa | vaar
also said to make a complex world simpler and to provide opt at least 900d

solutions, policies or products and so on. On the pg å C eae Point out
that all these goals can often be achieved more effect alia ug Ways, for
instance by market processes, or that market processes ae p : to indi.
vidual consumers, How can we be sure that standardizers find the best solutions fo,

everyone? Critics may also reject any form of regulation—including standardiza-
tion—in certain areas, as a threat to the individual actor s freedom and right to be
different and to innovate. Other critics may point out that the co-ordination, com-
munication, and simplification benefits of standardization are examples of benefits
provided by rules in general. So why prefer standardization as the form of regula-
tion? Standardization may be seen as an undemocratic form, as compared with state
legislation, for instance. Whatever our own conclusions, these controversies
demonstrate that the production and adoption of standards in various areas is by no
means a matter for indifference.

Structure of the book

What we discuss in this book is not primarily whether standardization is a good or
a bad thing. Instead we examine a number of questions connected with possible
ways of describing and explaining standardization and its effects. In this chapter we
have described standardization as an essential element of the regulatory system in a
society. This discussion is further developed in Part I of the book. In Chapter 2 we
compare standardization with three other basic social forms that are similar in their
effect, namely, the formal organization, the market, and the normative community.
We analyse similarities and differences between the various social forms and the
way they relate to and influence each other in society. We argue that the present
development towards increasing individualization and globalization tends to sup-
port standardization as a social form and to add to its importance.

Standardization is closely related to expertise, and is usually justified on the
erounds that there are some people who know best. The character of such exper-

tise and its implications for democracy are discussed in Chapter 3, where we
address, among other questions, the risk that expert groups m

to ‘know what is best’ but remaining responsible to no one.

In Chapter 4 we discuss what can be regarded as the boundary between stan-
dardization and formal organization. Those who Want to stand
not only standards

ay emerge claiming

ardize may create
but also an organization to the members of which the standards
apply. This may affect how the standards are spread, who follows them, to what

extent they are followed, whether they are changed along the way, and, if so, how.

In Part II of the book we look at a number of empirical studies in order to exam-
ine the supply side of standards, in other words, their production and distribution.
We focus on administrative standards, seeking to answer such questions as the fol-


THE CONTEMPORARY EXPANSION OF STANDARDIZATION | /

lowing: Who become standardizers and why? How do standardizers organize
themselves and how do they acquire legitimacy? What determines the content of
the standards created? How can the various standardizers agree on the standards that
are to apply? How do standardizers persuade people to follow their standards?

In Part III we discuss the demand side of standards, and will look at questions
such as the following: What motivates actors to follow standards? What does it
mean to follow standards? How do adopters interpret standards and how do stan-
dards affect the behaviour of those who adopt them? The acceptance of standards
is also discussed here on a more ageregated level. Under what conditions and to
what extent do standards make actors more alike—what is the relation between
standardization and uniformity? And how should we as followers of standards
appraise them—what are the pros and cons of standards?

Although we address a great many different questions regarding the supply of
standards and the demand for them, we see this as a small selection only of the inter-
esting questions that can be studied in connection with standardization. We regard
this book as a beginning and not as an end, as belonging to the first chapter on the
subject rather than the last. Standardization is a matter of central importance,
although our knowledge of the subject is still limited. We see this situation as a
challenge to further research and hope that many others will think likewise.


PART I

Regulating by Standards


2

Organizations, Markets, and
Standardization

Nits BrRuNSSON

In modern society much of human action is highly co-ordinated, often over great
distances. We can co-operate, interact, and communicate, even when we are far
apart. Hierarchies, or formal organizations, and markets are usually cited as the
principal forms of social co-ordination; they prescribe procedures for human inter-
action. In a formal organization, such as a company, an association or a nation-state,
an authoritative centre can issue rules or orders that co-ordinate people’s actions.
In markets buyers and sellers co-ordinate their activities by exchanging goods, ser-
vices, and money. And what sellers offer and what buyers demand 1s co-ordinated,
at least in the long run and to a certain extent.

However, the concepts of organization and market do not cover all forms of co-
ordination. Standardization is a third, and different, form. Standardization is just as
fundamental as organization and market. Without standardization the world would
look quite different, and co-ordination would be much more difficult. Standards
facilitate contact, co-operation, and trade over large areas and even throughout the
world.

All three forms of co-ordination—organizations, markets, and standardization—
may also be viewed as forms of control, as ways of guiding the behaviour of vari-
ous actors. In organizations the leaders control or influence what members such as
employees or citizens do or may do. In markets buyers and sellers influence each
other. Standards, too, affect what people do. As with organizations and sometimes
with markets, standardization can also be used expressly for control.
Standardization may be a way to influence individuals, organizations, or nation-
states to do their work in a certain manner, accomplish a certain result, report in a
certain way, etc.

Organizations, markets, and standardization may also be considered forms that
affect actors’ choices; they may be used to explain why actors behave in a certain
way. In organizations, much of people’s behaviour can be explained by the fact that
they work in an organization with certain tasks and traditions, and with a certain
management. In markets, actors’ behaviour may be partly explained by their adap-
tation to supply and demand. And sometimes what actors do is explainable by the

fact that they follow standards.


22 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

‘mati AV ; ‘ described as fundame
Organizations, markets, and standardization may also be describ undamen.

tal societal institutions, or rather a kind of meta-institution. Like other Institutions.

they include defined, and different, patterns of action, rules, and beliefs (Berger and

Luckman 1966). tai ar ates
In the first part of this chapter we discuss some basic simularitie: erences

izati mopar
between organizations, markets and standardization. så rn compare mr to
ee : orms in w
another form of co-ordination in society, namely, via shared n at we

term normative communities. | PE
Theoretically it is not difficult to distinguish between the four forms. In

practice, however, they tend to appear together, sometimes supporting each other,
sometimes competing. In the second part of the chapter we provide some exam-
ples of mixed forms, to be found in practice. In the third section we focus on the
competition aspect. We argue that the absence of one form opens the way for
another; the extent and range of standardization thus partly depends on the
prevalence and strength of the other institutions. Finally, we argue that standard-

ization is favoured by two major contemporary trends, individualization and glob-
alization.

a“.

Comparing organization, market, and standardization

Formal organization, market, and standardization, as institutions share some basic
characteristics. The patterns of action are well known and legitimate. If we claim
that we are acting in a way that is consistent with one of the institutions, most
people will understand what we mean. It is also completely legitimate to do so in
fact, in the right situation. All three include specific systems of beliefs, with argu-
ments as to why the institutions are justified, beliefs as to who the actors are and
what they want and do, and intentions that can be used when rationalizing actions
within the institutions.

Organizations, markets, and standardization are highly rationalized: they are usu-
ally defended by reference to their allegedly desirable consequences, rather than by
reference to tradition and long-established custom. Organizations, markets, and
standardization provide co-ordination and control on the basis of agreed proce-
dures, and in the case of standardization on the basis of agreed names, product
designs, etc. as well. Co-ordination and control do not arise from agreement on
values and norms. Actors do not need to share common norms to interact in mar-

Kets or organizations, or to follow the same standard. In this respect they differ from
normative communities, which we discuss later.

Like all institutions, organization, market, and standardization may be partly
inconsistent: our general beliefs may be somewhat at odds with actual patterns of
action and written rules may sometimes be inconsistent with one or the other
(Hernes 1978; Brunsson 1996). It is therefore important to distinguish between

these phenomena. We begin by discussing similarities and differences among the

three institutions as belief and rule systems, and then compare these to patterns of
action.


ORGANIZATIONS, MARKETS, AND STANDARDIZATION 23

Legitimacy

Markets are generally perceived as systems in which parties choose to interact with
others by exchanging goods, services, and money. Å fundamental feature of formal
organizations is that their leaders can issue orders or interdictions, or mandatory

rules, that is, directives. Standardizers, however, can resort to standards: they can
offer advice of a general nature to many others.

Standardization, like markets but unlike organizations, seems to leave the indi-
vidual actor free, at least in a formal sense. In principle we are not required to enter
into a particular market relationship and thus to accommodate to another party; nor
are we required, in principle, to observe a particular standard. We consider our-
selves free to buy and to attempt to sell what we like, and we should be free to
follow whatever standards we want. We are equally free to issue standards.
Organizations are different. In most organizations membership is voluntary. But
once we are members, we are obliged to follow orders and directives. And only
certain people are empowered to issue orders and directives. These aspects of insti-
tutional beliefs and rules have Important implications for how the institutions are
given legitimacy, for how particular actions are legitimated, and for how responsi-
bility is allocated among actors.

All forms of co-ordination and control require strong arguments in their favour
if they are to be accepted as legitimate in a world of many actors—that is, individ-
uals who believe in their independence and set great store by it (Brunsson 1996).
Organizations customarily claim legitimacy on the somewhat shaky ground that
their leaders are selected in a manner that entitles them to tell others what to do.
The claim may be based on the right of ownership, or on democratic principles,
with the governed having the opportunity to influence the selection of their rulers
and also to debate and protest. Legitimacy is claimed for markets and standardiza-
tion on the ground that in principle these forms are voluntary. Defenders of mar-
kets usually maintain that all market actors may influence their terms of exchange
and that no actor is master of another. And the voluntary nature of standards is one
of the principal arguments in favour of standardization.

Usually it is also claimed that standards are in the direct or indirect interests of
the people who are going to observe them, or that they fit with their values and
ambitions, just as products are said to serve their potential purchasers. This argu-
ment is needed since compliance with standards and the purchase of goods are vol-
untary acts. Furthermore, the argument makes standardization and markets
appealing. Other common arguments for standardization are that standards gener-
ally reflect what is best or at least desirable, or that they are objectively appropriate
(Guillet de Monthoux 1981, ch. 7).

Thus the general arguments for the three institutions differ. And so do the
arguments in favour of particular measures or items for the institutions—for a par-

ticular directive, merchandise, or standard. Here, too, compulsion and voluntary
acceptance lead to different strategies for claiming legitimacy, making these strate-
gies different in organizations than in markets or for standardization. When people


: STANDARDS
24 A WORLD OF STANI

RØE EE anizations, there 1s less need to demonstrate
are supposed to obey leaders in organizat ate the

r « | h
benefit their compliance will bring. Instead.t ot ted. the:
lire 5 are CO DE acceptec
acy. If orders or directives are pted, the issuer mug,

be considered to have the right to give these orders and directives.

If a voluntary course of action 1s proposed, more perstasive arguments are
required to support the proposal itself than to give ee to vi Person advance.
ing it. Those offering something voluntary are more readily accepted than what.
hen one moves beyond organizations, Virtually anyone G
entitled to propose anything, but persuasive arguments are usually required tO win
acceptance; compulsion cannot be used. This point becomes particularly clear jp
situations in which many take advantage of the opportunity to offer something,
since ‘competition’ often arises. In open societies many are free to offer their views
to the mass media, though they will have to argue quite convincingly to get any-
one to agree with them. Products sold in a market usually require much more
advertising than the producer. The same 1s true of standards; the standardizer does
not need the same legitimacy as the legislator, for example. But standardizers who
really want their standards accepted must argue that the standards are morally right,

beneficial for the users, and the like.
All this tends to generate numerous standardizers and standards, but does not

guarantee that the demand for the standards will be equally strong. This is similar
to a problem common in markets, namely, lack of demand, but it is different from
the common tendency in more organized, socialist economies, where, instead.

there tends to be a notable lack of supply (Tarschys 1988).

e leaders themselves must enjoy
a

high degree of legitim

ever they are offering. W

Allocation of responsibility

The three institutions allocate responsibility differently. In Western culture respon-
sibility is given to the one who is considered influential, who has by his own free
will caused something to occur (Aristotle, 3. 1). In formal organizations it 1s
assumed that leaders are powerful; leaders therefore bear most of the responsibility.
When organizational leaders issue directives or orders, their responsibility is
demonstrated very clearly, but leaders can also become responsible when they have
not acted in this way. In states and companies, governments or boards of directors
may even be held responsible for events of which they knew nothing.

In markets, and with standardization, responsibility is allocated differently.
Anyone who purchases a good or follows a standard assumes a large portion of the
responsibility. Buying goods and observing standards are supposed to be voluntary
acts, so it is the adopter who is supposed to make the choice, and thus bear the
responsibility. In markets, however, sellers in some cases become partly responsi-
ble. For example, sellers may be held legally liable for products which prove dan-
gerous after purchase: the customer’s free will js presumed not to have been
reflected in the choice of product since she or he lacked the necessary information.
It is difficult to hold standardizers responsible, even if we would like to do so, for
they provide general advice for certain types of actors in certain situations, normally


ORGANIZATIONS, MARKETS, AND STANDARDIZATION 25

without direct contact with the adopter. It is easy to claim that an individual
adopter has misunderstood who he or she was or the nature of the situation.

When standards govern procedures and functions rather than the specific design
of a product or process, the standardizer’s responsibility is even more limited. The
standardizer does not specify exactly what must be done, or what the result is to be,
but leaves these to those following the standard.

Even though standardization places most of the responsibility on the one choos-
ing to follow the standard, that responsibility may have its limits. Our responsibil-
ity may be less if we observe a popular standard than if we go our own way. A
company that follows ‘generally accepted accounting principles’ is less likely to be
hable for misleading financial statements than if it had devised its own accounting
principles. There appears to be a similar ‘safety in numbers’ in relation to markets

if everyone sells toxic goods, the responsibility of the individual seller is probably
less than if there were only the one.

Complaints

The differences between these institutions in the allocation of responsibility are also
reflected in the extent to which they generate complaints, as well as in who com-
plains and where the complaints are directed. Markets and standardization gener-
ate fewer complaints than organizations. In organizations most people can blame
someone else, whereas market actors or those who follow standards have them-
selves to blame. Organizations tend to generate systems to collect, support, and
handle complaints. The systems may include legal procedures, labour unions, or
protest movements.

Complaints are particularly frequent in organizations where membership is com-
pulsory, such as nation-states, since dissatisfied members lack the option of resign-
ing. Complaints also become important in other organizations when it is difficult
or awkward to exit, such as may be the case with the organizations where we are
employed. In non-monopolistic markets and with standardization, the exit option
is normally more realistic; it is often easier for a dissatisfied party to stop buying the
product or observing the standard than to complain. A combination of strong iner-
tia when it comes to changing employers and fairly competitive markets tends to
reinforce trade unions and leave consumer organizations weak. And we rarely hear
about resistance movements against poor standards.

In monopolistic markets complaints are more likely, and in markets that do not
become more competitive, for instance because of high entry barriers for new sell-
ers, complaints will continue. When it comes to standardizaton, however, ‘entry’
is generally easy; so rather than complain, those who are dissatisfied with a certain
standard are more likely to suggest a new one. Dissatisfaction in the standardization
field may well lead to more standards.

When fewer complaints arise, less information emerges about what is wrong. In
markets sellers can see that they are losing customers, but they often find it hard to
know why. Sellers run the risk of having only satisfied customers—the dissatisfied


pr A WORLD OF STANDARDS

ZU

ones do not come back. Sellers are therefore less likely ee complaints, and
will then miss out on information that could have helped them to attract MOTE cys.

tomers (March 1981). Standardizers face a similar risk, that they will not learp very
much about what is wrong with their standards or how to improve those standard.

and others in the future.

Support in legislation

Both formal organizations and markets are regulated by extensive legislation, which
for the most part facilitates their functioning. Various legal forms of Organization,
and the rights and obligations of their leadership, are established by law. The rights
and duties of buyers and sellers are regulated in laws applicable to purchases, con.
tracts, etc.

There are no laws regulating standardization in itself; anyone may issue standards.
There is no legislation which holds standardizers responsible for having given bad
advice. Only if the standardizers also occupy another role—such as that of
professionals, of organizational leadership, or of market actors—can the legality of
their standards be tested and complaints have legal consequences: a physician who
publishes advice on how to commit suicide or murder may run into trouble. A sales-
person whose instructions for a product lead to an accident may face legal action.
The management of an organization whose recommendations endanger the health
and safety of its employees also risks prosecution, or complaints at the very least.

General and distanced

Standards also differ from organizations and markets in another respect: there is co-
ordination and control only at a general level—many people are to act in the same
way 1n many situations. For standards are rules for the general case; standardization
is not a method for deciding a particular case on its own merits. Even if large orga-
nizations and markets may also treat a great number of similar cases alike, at least in
theory it is always possible to fit the solution to the situation, to act on a case-by-
case basis. In an organization orders may apply to a particular individual and a par-

ticular situation. In markets, products and prices may differ depending on the
occasion and the customer. Market transactions normally take place as direct inter-

actions between specific buyers and sellers.
By comparison with organizations and markets, standardization is a more indi-
rect form of co-ordination and control, exercised through large, impersonal sys-

tems rather than direct interaction. Standardization is done at a distance in time and
space from both the people and the situations concerned.

Foundation in science

Finally, organizations, markets, and standardization also differ in the extent to
which they are related to science. Most modern institutions are reflected, studied,


ORGANIZATIONS, MARKETS, AND STANDARDIZATION 2/

and partly constructed by modern science. Different academic disciplines concern
different institutions: for example, psychology relates to the individual, economics
to markets, political science to the nation-state, and organization theory to organi-
zations. These disciplines help to legitimize their respective institutions, to create
and spread knowledge about them. perhaps even to call them in question, but they
also help to develop them further, to increase their complexity.

Standardization as an institution is much less rooted in science, despite its con-
siderable practical importance. This fact seems to be reflected in how standardiza-
tion is treated in the mass media: we would maintain that standardization is given
less attention and is discussed in a much less complex way than markets and orga-
nizations.

On the other hand, it is often argued that particular standards are based on
scientific evidence. Individual organizational directives and market transactions
generally need much less reference to a foundation in science. But a standard is sup-
posed to incorporate what is generally best, and often that question is ultimately
decided by the weight of scholarly authority. However, actual academic support
for a standard may be tenuous. As will be demonstrated in Chapter 5, many con-
temporary administrative standards reflect administrative theory from the turn of
the last century rather than the current state of the discipline.

Principle and practice

Formal organizations, markets, and standardization are thus distinctly different
forms of co-ordination, control, and choice; each has its own particular features.
These fundamental differences are usually cited when the institutions are discussed,
questioned, and defended. The different features belong to our institutionalized
belief systems, and they are often incorporated into the rules in each institution. It
is less certain that they are part of our institutionalized patterns of action. For
instance, in many formal organizations control by the top may be limited; in fact,
top-down control may be only nominal, with actual control being exercised from
the bottom up or from outside (Scott 1998, ch. 12; Evans 1995). In these cases
organizations concentrate responsibility to a greater extent than power: the per-
ceived power is greater than the actual. In addition, organizational leaders may not
in fact be appointed according to the principles, democratic or otherwise, cited to
legitimize their power. As for markets, there are situations where market power is
so highly concentrated that any notion of voluntary participation by certain actors
is an illusion (Persson 1992). Nevertheless, institutionalized beliefs describe many
actors as powerful; responsibility in markets tends to be diluted and to be held even
by those with little actual power (Brunsson 1996).

Similarly, standardization in practice may differ from standardization in prin-
ciple. The voluntary element in the adoption of a standard may prove meagre in
practice, as we describe in more detail in Chapter 9. A third party may make it
difficult for actors to avoid a standard. Buyers may prefer products that comply with
certain standards. Interaction with other products may be so important and so


28 A WORLD OF STANDARDS
da Å

difficult to achieve otherwise that standards cannot be ignored —- standards
may be generally considered so obviously superior that even ener who doubt
their value is virtually forced to adopt them. All these situations make it more likely
that standards will be adopted, and consequently that their co-ordinative effects will
be realized. So it is precisely when standards are in fact not voluntary that they are

most effective in co-ordinating.

Also, when the following of standards 1s largely involuntary, the influence of
standardizers and standards on others is considerable. Even if standardizers bear
little responsibility, they may thus have great power. As with monopolistic mar-
kets, standardization sometimes concentrates power but dilutes responsibility, This
phenomenon is discussed in further detail in the next chapter. ae

There may be further differences between belief and practice in relation to
standardization. It is argued that standards facilitate co-ordination, but there is no
guarantee that this actually occurs. For instance, if only a minority observes a par-
ticular standard, differences may be accentuated, thus making co-ordination more

difficult. And whatever the standardizers say, the process of standardization may
produce a standard which is clearly suboptimal.

Normative communities

As has been mentioned, organizations, markets, and standardization can provide
co-ordination and control even when the actors do not agree on the same values.
But co-ordination, control, and choice may also be achieved through shared val-
ues and norms, in a normative community; this form has sometimes been termed
the clan (Ouchi 1980). Like other rules, such as directives and standards, norms
may control actors and their choice of actions. Norms also co-ordinate: if a num-
ber of individuals share the same norms. they find it easier to work together to

attain common goals. In societies or situations where many observe the same
norms, it should be possible to achieve co-operation and co-ordination with less
resort to the more procedurally oriented forms, formal organizations, markets, or
standardization. There is less need for markets, organizations, or standardization in

a family community which is based on well-entrenched shared norms than in a
multicultural city.

To a greater or lesser degree, a locality—be it a village, a province, or a nation—
may show characteristics of a normative community. A normative community may
also consist of groups of blood relatives, such as nuclear or extended families.

Professions are examples of normative communities that are particularly important
In contemporary society.

For outsiders, some normative communities do not possess

the same unques-
tionable legitimacy,

as controlling and co-ordinating forms, as organizations, mar-
kets, and standardization do. The normative community of a village, a nation, ora

family is difficult to justify rationally; legitimacy is based rather on factors like tra-

dition, which have little convincing power in modern times. This does not apply

to professions, which in this respect constitute more modern normative communi-


å (
ORGANIZATIONS, MARKETS, AND STANDARDIZATION 29

tes. Today's professions also have strong ties to science and the academic world.
To a large extent, contemporary professional norms are created and instilled at uni-
versities (Abbott 1988)

Normative communities differ from the other forms in additional ways. It is easy
tor leaders of organizations to issue directives, and for standardizers to promulgate
standards. Whether anyone accepts or follows them, or is even aware of them, 1s
another matter. Establishing norms is generally much more difficult. By definition
4 norm must be not only accepted but also internalized. Most norms are created by
prolonged processes such as upbringing, training, or, perhaps, a close long-term
affiliation with others. In addition, norms usually have a certain stability and are dif-

ficult to change; they do not easily lend themselves to manipulation, not even from
an otherwise powerful leadership.

Mixed forms

So far we have described formal organizations, markets, standardization, and nor-
mative communities as distinct and different forms for exercising co-ordination,
control, and choice. They are easier to distinguish in theory than in practice, for in

practice they usually appear together and influence each other. Organizations may
include some market solutions, and what we call markets may in practice include
some organizational aspects. And standardization is often an ingredient in existing
organizatons and markets. Moreover, all three forms may influence jointly held

norms, and be influenced by them. Sometimes the various forms are complemen-
tary and mutually reinforcing; sometimes they conflict.

Organization and standardization

Organizations often use standards for co-ordination, control, and choice. By fol-
lowing highly legitimate standards imposed from outside, they can avoid making
their own decisions. The task of governing becomes more limited in scope. It may
also become easier to get orders and directives accepted and implemented, when
management can refer to standards, rather than just exert its own authority; for
instance, members of organizations may more readily accept management by
objectives during periods when this is a popular standard than when it is not.

Some standards become incorporated in directives. The management of indus-
trial companies may decide that certain product standards should be followed by
the company’s designers and production managers, As described in Chapter 1,
some standards may be turned into national law.

Standards may also be based to a varying degree on directives: the two may be
intermingled to some extent. For example, standards should be adapted to existing
law (Stuurman 1995). When the EU initiates standardization, as described in the
preceding chapter, it may be said to require standardization by directive. When
seeking to legitimize their standards, international standards organizations use the
same kinds of argument as other organizations; for example, they claim that the

Ee —r===—«ssr =


30 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

standards have been issued by a body that has been established through a fir and

representative procedure (see Chapter 6).

Markets and standardization

Standards are important in most markets. Standards may facilitate market transac
tions by making it easier to obtain information on the goods exchanged or on the

opposite party, thus reducing transaction costs. If the same standard applies in many

countries, more companies are in a position to compete. Moreover, there are

greater opportunities for mass production. This 1s the kind of reasoning that the EU
is using to justify its efforts to establish and support common standards for the entire
European market.

The absence of common standards may even prevent markets from arising. For
example, national markets may be tightly closed if products have to be especially
adapted because of national legislation, particular local market conditions, or
national standards. This poses an obstacle to a common international market. Such
conditions made the EU decide to use common European standards to promote
the common market.

In addition, many standards are connected to markets in an even more concrete
way: there are markets for standards. For example, a standard may be purchased
from a standards organization, and if help is needed in interpreting and introduc-
ing standards, or certifying that they have been adopted, such services may be
obtained, at a price, from organizations or individuals.

Normative communities and standardization

Norms, too, are present with markets, organizations, and standardization. For
example, market transactions are facilitated if the actors share and respect the norm
that condemns cheating. Nation-states and other organizations, the members of
which share certain fundamental norms, are easier to manage or govern. Professions
may sometimes create standards for others. For example, physicians may publish
books on self-care.

Standards are usually based in part on norms: standards which differ too greatly
from norms are not readily accepted. Administrative standards are based largely on
shared ideas and norms for how organizations should function (Furusten 1999).
Standards may help to establish and maintain norms. For instance, budgeting was
introduced as a standard for companies in the Anglo-Saxon world in the 1930s

(Miller 1999); now it is a strong norm, something most administrators take for
granted (Wallander 1994).

Standardization as a problem

That the different forms are found together does not necessarily mean that they

complement each other in a harmonious way. They sometimes conflict, with one
form having negative effects on another.


ORGANIZATIONS, MARKETS, AND STANDARDIZATION 31

Standardization may undermine organizations. If some standards become very
popular or some standardizers are highly credible, the leadership may find it diffi-
cult to go against them. For example, in periods when decentralization 1s a popu-
lar standard promoted by respected experts, managers who want to centralize their
organization will have an uphill battle on their hands.

Similarly, standardization may undermine markets. If market solutions to envi-
ronmental problems, for example, are inferior to proposed standards, legislators and
others may reject markets as a form of control in this sphere. Also, in markets stan-
dards tend to favour some actors to the disadvantage of others. A particular stan-
dard is likely to be better adapted to the hardware, know-how, and traditions of
one manufacturer than those of others. Once a standard has become established and
accepted, it is very difficult for new and better ways to win market approval. Thus,
standardization may not only promote but also inhibit competition and innovation.

Standards may undermine normative communities like professions by offering
solutions contrary to the values of the profession, though attractive to outsiders.
Examples include administrative standards which 20 against doctors’ professional
norms but which are nevertheless introduced into health care by administrators.
Such standards may substantially complicate professional health care.

Standardization as an alternative

So even if formal organizations, markets, and normative communities sometimes
complement and support each other, they may also clash. Often they are alterna-
tives, with one form weak or non-existent where another is already established.

The frequency of one form is then inversely correlated with the frequency of the

others: both the need to use a form and the possibility of doing so diminish if one
or more of the other forms are already present.

Which form will predominate in a particular context depends on the special
characteristics of each form and how well it fits the situation. The use of standard-

ization is at least partly explainable by the need for it: if other instruments of con-
trol and co-ordination are not available, standards will be in demand. But a need is
not sufficient; it must also be possible to create and follow standards. We now look

at situations in which we are likely to find standardization rather than organizations,
markets, or normative communities.

Standardization instead of organizations

If formal organization and standards are alternatives, standardization is more likely
if there is no organization. National standards organizations have usually been
founded with the backing of the state and large companies; however, their mission
was to develop standards for aspects of industrial activity which were not and
should not be subsumed under a formal organization, be it the state and its legisla-

tion or individual companies. As will be argued below, the growing importance
of global standardization In recent decades may be due to a vast need for global


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

» global organizatio
dination in the absence of a strong supreme $ : ER World
co-ordination

| rt ition from direct;
ty. to standardize, since there will be little compet | h | ‘ "es. Where
a i nization, the scope for standardization 1s ” “pe mited. If there
re 18 an or AK irecti 1Zatj
vr state that issued administrative directives for all other Organization,
were a strong state

| 'etv. there would be substantially less scope for a vast array of administers.
in a society, there es laws stipulating the basic requirements for å Joint
tive standards. In many countries =" | Also. th
ent standards from emerging 1n this area. Also, the SCOPE for
mpany prev EE | |
stock oempan prove limited within individual companies than Outside
generating standards is more h
ting standards 1s greater when we have ma
them. Therefore the scope for generating
arr! fa few large ones (see also Chapter 10).
small organizations instead of a fe 5 gre nak, Wh
Standardization is also favoured when organizations are weak. CN states or
other organizations cannot resort to directives or orders, the need and Opportunities
for standardization increase. The leadership may lack the authority, legitimacy, or
power to exercise control through directives and orders; subordinate units May con-
sider themselves so independent that they need not comply. Organizations with few
common norms or with conflicting norms—examples include many politica] bod-
1es—may also find it difficult to exercise control through directives and orders, and
easier to use standards. If there is conflict among the leaders, they may find it harder
to agree on mandatory directives than on voluntary standards. Directives and orders
also entail greater responsibility than standards; unwillingness or inability to accept
responsibility may be yet another reason for choosing standards rather than directives
and orders. While not totally preventing organizations from Issuing directives and
orders, these factors may restrict their capacity to do so in all areas and situations, |
The EU appears to be illustrative in these respects. The EU has limited author-
ity, since its members are nation-states, which by tradition guard their indepen-
dence. The EU rules for reaching decisions make it difficult to reach a consensus,

and the systems of accountability are poorly developed (the so-called democratic

deficit). It is understandable that standardization is important in the EU and in
similar organizations.

ny

There are cases where standards play an increasingly Important role in nation- |
states. So-called deregulation of activities in the public sector has limited the scope

of central directives. Instead, standards have become more common. In Sweden a
number of authorities have found their role

controlling. One example
education, with a predilect
tion, with largely an adviso
eral instances the office
Sahlin-Andersson 1995).

has become one of advising rather than
is school administration, where the national board of
10n for directives, was replaced by an office of educa-
ry role and issuing a great number of standards; in sev-
has explicitly refused to issue directives (Jacobsson and
Such advisory bodies derive their authority from their

expertise, rather than as an arm of off
with a new self-image of schools and

cial power. This development is concurrent
other public services as independent actors
nt hierarchy, and with their ensuing unwill-


ORGANIZATIONS, MARKETS, AND STANDARDIZATION 33

Ås we have previously mentioned, standards need not in fact be completely vol-
untary; indeed, they may be fairly binding. And directives and orders may entail lit-
tle control (Brunsson and Jénsson 1978; Jacobsson 1984 and 1989). In effect, the
degree of control and co-ordination may not always be reduced if directives and
orders are replaced by standards. Standardization may be a means of maintaining
extensive control when orders and directives are unavailable. Thus, the EU may be
able to achieve a high degree of control and co-ordination in certain areas without
being transformed into a strong organization, with a strong management.

Sometimes standards have an even higher degree of control than directives.
Those who follow standards have themselves decided to do so; therefore, they may
be more loyal to standards than to directives decided and imposed by others. At
least in certain situations, people tend to be sceptical toward directives issued by
organizational management, to take them not too seriously, perhaps to make light
of them, or even to violate them. People may find it more difficult to maintain the

same distance toward standards, which they have freely adopted, thus establishing
a commutment which they would rarely feel to directives.

Standardization instead of markets

Good solutions and co-ordination are sometimes achieved through markets, in
which case there is less need for standardization. But markets frequently lead to
poor solutions or poor co-ordination, or both. It may be difficult for better solu-

tions to take hold; for example new companies with new products may find it hard
to enter the market. As described in the preceding chapter, the need for co-

ordination and compatibility with previous products may lead to lock-in effects,
preventing new and better solutions from being adopted. Or new and worse solu-
tions are adopted by some, forcing others to follow. An example sadly familiar to
us writers is the fact that we have been forced to use word-processing programs

which are declining in quality while requiring ever more powerful computers.
In other situations market mechanisms lead to multiple solutions, with no pos-

sibility of co-ordination. For example, there is a global market for electrical prod-
ucts, but we do not have identical plug-and-socket connections throughout the
world, and this incompatibility is a problem for travellers the world over.

In such situations there is a need for standardization. Unfortunately, it is precisely
here that standardization is often especially difficult to achieve. For instance, dif-
ferences in plug-and-socket connections have not been eliminated, despite years of
effort to establish common global standards. When major market actors have made
substantial investments in a particular solution, they have little interest in abandon-
ing it. While companies in that situation may participate in the process of stan-
dardization, they may wish to retain the undesirable standards, or perhaps to

dispense with standards altogether. It may be somewhat easier to agree on standards
'n new areas where neither sellers nor buyers have made substantial investments.
By contrast, there are fewer obstacles to market solutions in relation to adminis-

trative practices in organizations. Here there 1s little need for co-ordination among


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

34

enge is to introduce appropriate Solution,

farene organizations; the only ch ar nd
different organizations, + to charige their administrative syste

: A x ; å
The sums that organizations must = |
| ; ~chanis

normally quite modest. Market mech

7 rce organizati

dards; competition should fo | | ,
ty , . rea. Markets do n

are created in precisely this a Ot produce

room for standards. The reason is Probab

Ms dre
ms should help obviate the need far stan

ons to adopt the best solution,

Yet many standards

problem with achieving product standardization which we described above Was
that too many actors knew what was best (for them), what PR markets from
selecting the best administrative solution 18 that we know too little.

Standardization instead of normative communities

Where many actors share the same norms, there is less need for standardization, If
for example, everyone agrees that organizations should have objectives, there is lit-
tle point in establishing a standard to that effect. If such a standard IS nevertheless
introduced, it does not always reinforce the norm. Instead, at least in some cases it
conveys the message that a norm is now voluntary because it has become a stan-
dard. The case of directives, such as laws, which also express shared norms, is dif.
ferent. They are by nature involuntary; they lend authority to certain norms and
specify the sanctions for non-compliance.

However, although administrative standards often correspond in large measure
to established norms in administration, they are still created in abundance, and there
is obviously a demand for them. Such standards may be created because standard-
izers to a substantial degree share prevailing norms, or because they adapt their stan-
dards to prevailing norms in order to get them accepted. It is more difficult to
explain why there is a demand for standards that agree with prevailing norms. One
reason may be that they not only express norms but develop them further: they
indicate in greater detail and with more technical specificity where the norms may
lead. There may also be a need for written confirmation of this kind of norm by an

outside party; approval by outside expertise may add to the legitimacy of the norm.
Nevertheless, we are again left with the impression that standardization is easy

when there is little need for it.

On the other hand, there may be a need for standards when shared norms are
absent. When we deal with unknown parties in foreign cultures, we would be well
advised to use standard contracts, to use standard terminology, and to know that
the opposite party observes certain accounting standards, so that we may feel con-
fident about his financial position. As previously mentioned, when there are few
common norms, 1t 1s also easier to issue voluntary standards than directives that all
must obey. However, it does not follow that standardization is without problems:
differences in norms may make it difficult to agree on standards, too.

Areas dominated by strongly established professions, such as health care and the
legal system, tend to show relatively little standardization. Within professions and
their sphere of activity, co-ordination and contro] may be exercised largely through


ORGANIZATIONS, MARKETS, AND STANDARDIZATION 35

shared norms. In any case, there is not much room for following standards imposed
trom outside. In this respect, strong professions resemble strong organizations.
Professions also reduce the need for standardization by offering an alternative form
of co-ordination and control. A patient may be treated by several different doctors
who have little contact with each other, since each can be confident that the oth-
ers will follow professional norms and procedures. Doctors throughout the world

can easily communicate with one another, thanks to their system of common
norms.

Supply and demand

Thus, the extent of standardization in a particular situation may be expected to
depend on the availability of alternatives—organizations, markets, and shared
norms. The alternatives may reduce the supply of standards as well as the demand
for them. But the opposite may also be true: we have previously shown how the
different forms are sometimes complementary rather than mutually exclusive. To
determine when we may expect standardization to occur and standards to be
accepted is no easy task.

Supply and demand in regard to standardization are sometimes interdependent.
Supply may affect demand; a standard may become popular once it exists, even
though no one asked for it previously. And demand may also affect supply, so that
standards which are expected to be in demand are created. But harmony between
supply and demand with respect to standards, or between the capacity and the need
for standardization, is far from guaranteed, for several reasons.

It is easy to issue standards as long as it does not matter whether they are
accepted. Perhaps this is why academics and clergymen are so generous with
advice. If standardizers want to have their standards applied in practice, their task
becomes considerably harder, sometimes even impossible. If they really care
whether their standards are observed, as opposed to merely believing that they
should be observed, the supply of standards may decrease.

Sometimes supply and demand are closely interlinked. The effect may be to
reduce the supply. If those to whom a standard will apply are involved in develop-
ing and approving it prior to introduction, it may be difficult to arrive at any stan-
dard at all. The average time required to develop a standard at ISO has been seven
years. On the other hand, such a standard is sometimes readily accepted once it has
come into existence.

When supply and demand are separately determined, and those for whom the
standard is intended are not involved in developing it, the process may be more
expeditious and successful. Administrative standards are formulated in rapid suc-
cession by consultants, pundits in management, and others. The difficulty lies in
getting others to follow them.

Naturally, it is easier to gain acceptance for standards which bring substantial
improvements to many people. But it may be hard to find such standards: good
solutions may have already been implemented, leaving little demand for standards.


A WORLD OF STANDARDS
46

Greater uncertainty as to the best solution may en : _— standards; 28 Men.
tioned above, this may be one reason why it 5 so ev E ae and se] Adminic.
erative standards. Since it 18 hard to know or ee arr wi ow to be g 8004
administrative solution, both standardizers and potential users are prepareg © ty

something new. | d the | |
ntroversial, and the least controversj:
Standards may be more or less CO al May be

the easiest to formulate and propagate. This may be the case with standards that do

| : ices (or practices planned fo
not deviate substantially from current practice ( p Sp : r the future)
or which are not expected to produce any dramatic negative effects,

Thus, the most easily created and accepted standards may be those of Minor
importance to users and their activities, with uncertain benefits, and of little prac
tical significance. Standards with a clear and substantial impact are harder to Create
and establish, Often, though, the difficulty is not insurmountable, and standard, are
still a very significant phenomenon for society as a whole. Nevertheless, we may
note once again that standardization is an area where needs and opportunities do
not always match, and where supply may exceed demand and vice versa.

Individualization, globalization, and standardization

Two current trends should tend to make standardization even more Important as 3
form of co-ordination and control. One is towards individualization, a growing
number of stronger actors. The other is towards globalization.

Individualization

Individualization means that people increasingly see themselves and are seen by
others as highly independent individuals, with clear boundaries and their own
norms, interests, and goals, and that they want to or have to express their individ-
uality in their social relations (Thomas et al. 1987). Such individuals do not readily
submit to organizational hierarchies. Normative communities, even professions,
are not particularly compatible with strong individualism. Markets should suit indi-
viduals better, since the market is an institution which in principle presupposes

genuine individuals with distinct preferences, clear economic boundaries, and the
capability to make their own independent choices.

For individuals, standardization is also preferable to organizations and normative
communities. If people see themselves as free and independent, it will be hard to

control them, either by directive or by orders, and they will be suspicious towards

common norms. They can be expected to be more receptive to standards, which

they are free to follow, and which are also said to be in their own interests: to fol-
low standards, an actor does not have to give up his freedom of choice or sacrifice
his or her interests. Standards are a form of advice, and advice is a form of attempted
influence that even strong individuals have relatively little problem accepting.
Advice is becoming a more common commodity, within organizations as well as
outside them. Not only are standards appropriate; so also is advice in the form of a


ORGANIZATIONS, MARKETS, AND STANDARDIZATION 37

recommendation to an individual person in a specific situation. A modern school

tends to send a troublesome pupil to a psychologist for counselling rather than try
to correct his behaviour by reprimanding him. And parents have access to an enor-

mous literature offering standards on how to raise children (which by the way tends
to contain advice on how to turn them into true individuals).

It is not only individuals who have difficulty with directives. A formal organiza-
tion is expected to have a substantial degree of autonomy, clear boundaries, and its
own interests. None of these fits very well with the acceptance of directives from
outside. Following standards is more consistent with the image of an integral orga-
nization. So, the more organizations there are, the more standards can be expected.
And the number of distinct formal organizations does seem to be increasing, Just as
the number of real individuals is.

At least in Europe, in both public and private sectors, large hierarchies are split-
ting up into small, separate organizations, each with its own goals and clear bound-
aries. Government agencies and corporate departments are less popular now than
autonomous entities or companies that deal with others on market terms. Concepts
in favour in recent years are concentration on the core business, back to basics, out-
sourcing, and privatization (Brunsson and Sahlin-Andersson, forthcoming).

The more autonomous organizations that emerge from the processes to which
these concepts give rise can no longer be controlled by directives from their for-
mer headquarters. But they may well be receptive to standards. For instance, a for-
mer department that has now become a subcontractor can no longer be ordered to
install certain management principles, but the buyer can expect it to follow an ISO
9000 standard. Public services which traditionally followed centrally decided direc-
tives will now be both able and willing to listen to advice.

Interaction may make the interacting parties into stronger actors. It has been argued
that by co-operating in the EU, European nation-states have become stronger actors,
more conscious than before of their own interests in many other fields than the tra-
ditional domain of foreign policy (Jacobsson 1997). This should pose a dilemma for
the EU as an organization: it will have contributed to the emergence of actors which
are easier to co-ordinate with standards than with directives, and which are better

adapted to looser forms of intergovernmental co-operation with other states than to
a more hierarchical and more strongly organized federation.

Globalization

Standardization is also influenced by globalization. Globalization manifests itself in
many ways (Robertson 1992). First, there 1s more interaction between actors which
are far apart geographically; global markets provide one example. Secondly, we
find there are more international or transnational organizations, such as Shell, the
EU, or the International Federation of Football Associations (FIFA). Thirdly, glob-
alization means that it is easier to communicate over vast distances. Finally, we are
caught up in a kind of mental globalization: we feel more familiar with people and
with life in faraway places; more of us find them relevant; more of us compare them


38 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

with ourselves and our own situation. We find that more things are basically alike.

belonging to the same category, or at least related. Such fundamental similarities

make differences truly interesting and measurable. | | |
Fundamental similarities among many actors permits the widespread adoption of
standards: when many define themselves as belonging to the same category or
being in a certain type of situation, many will also be receptive to the same stan-
dard. For instance, individualization is a global phenomenon, and individuals con-
sider themselves basically alike, compare themselves with each other, and become

receptive to the same standards.

The need for standardization increases with globalization, because of the absence
of a strong formal organization at the global level, and because, in the multitude of
cultures encompassed, there are often no common norms. There are also many
obstacles to truly transnational, global markets; many so-called world markets con-
sist essentially of numerous separate national markets, each with its own special tra-
ditions, conditions, and rules. Global standardization can be an important
instrument for creating truly transnational markets.

Thus, globalization in its present phase appears to augment the need for stan-
dardization. Until more normative communities have been created and markets
have become less national, many may contend that standardization will be neces-
sary. Standardization is also a form of regulation which 1s possible to implement in
situations where organization is weak and a common culture is largely absent.

Standardization is also appropriate in other ways for the emerging global struc-
ture. Most standardizers are in the private sector—as befits a structure without a
(world) government. There is no lack of standardizers; plenty of individuals and
organizations are willing to create standards which they would like to apply glob-
ally, in view of the fundamental similarities that they find among actors and con-
ditions in different parts of the world. For the same reason, many people
throughout the world are ready to listen even to standardizers far away. A final fac-
tor favouring global standards is that most standards are defended by referring to
expertise, which generally knows no boundaries. Experts in most areas consistently
hold that their expertise is independent of geography or culture, they communi-
cate and interact with each other on a global scale, and they often refer to modern
science, a global phenomenon of primary importance.

At the same time, there are certain tendencies towards globalization of social
forms other than standardization; consequently, global standardization may become
less important than if it had been the only form of co-ordination at the global level.
The market for many products is becoming more global. There is some tendency
towards greater globalization of normative communities, often canalized through
professions and normatively oriented organizations. Many professions are becom-
ing more global; their values are largely the same the world over. In addition, a
number of global organizations founded on shared values are being created; exam-
ples include Amnesty International and the Worldwide Fund for Nature.

Furthermore, as we have argued above, a need for standards does not guarantee
that it is possible to create standards and to gain acceptance for them. At the global


2 (
ORGANIZATIONS, MARKETS, AND STANDARDIZATION V7

level the standards that it is easiest to generate are those that do not have important
co-ordinative effects; efforts to establish more co-ordinative standards sometimes
fail. For instance, there are many administrative standards that have adherents
world-wide, whereas we still have to struggle with differing national standards for
many technical systems. Both Swedish and Malaysian companies follow [SO 9001,
but they use different electrical plug-and-socket connections. Railway authorities
throughout Europe try to be up to date with the latest trends in administration, but
differences in their technical systems still make it difficult or impossible to roll a
locomotive across a national boundary. And Great Britain is introducing the met-
ric system inch by inch, as the saying goes. We may have to put up with monot-
ony where we would have appreciated variety, while having to live with costly and
irritating technical incompatibility where we would have appreciated uniformity.


3

Standardization and Expert Knowledge

BENGT JACOBSSON

Standardization is closely linked to expertise and is usually motivated by the view
that there are some persons who know best. Self-appointed experts or organiza-
tions working for a good cause try to convince others that they—or even all—
would be better off if they only followed some specific rules about what to do.
Reference to expert knowledge is often used to give standardization legitimacy.
Experts do indeed play an important part in standardization. In this chapter, we dis-
cuss the relationship between standardization and expert knowledge.

From studies of organizations, we know that information gathered and prepared
with the greatest care by experts may not be used at all in making decisions. It may
serve primarily as a signal or symbol (Feldman and March 1981). Nevertheless,
there may be a strong demand for what experts have to say. And there is ample
indication that this demand may be increasing. Every day we see evidence of the
demand for expert knowledge in society. This kind of knowledge is viewed as a
scarce commodity when important issues are being considered. Wrong decisions
are explained by the absence of expert knowledge, or by failure to listen to the
experts that were available.

For example, it has been considered a problem that nation-states ignore the
common knowledge that has been developed within so-called epistemic commu-
nities (Haas 1990). In discussing the rules for European Monetary Union (EMU),
a Swedish professor of economics added that decisions in other important areas
(economic policy, traffic, health care, housing, etc.) should also be left to experts.
When new environmental legislation was being debated, a municipal official con-
tended that major environmental issues should be decided by a ‘competent supe-
nor environmental court on the basis of law’. He reasoned that politicians almost
never give the environment as much priority as competent experts do.

Modern societies place great faith in abstract systems, particularly the work of
experts (Giddens 1990). Toulmin (1990) maintains that our modern way of life
dates from the seventeenth century and is based on our trust in what is general,
written, universal, and timeless rather than what is specific, spoken, concrete, and
conditioned by its time. Since that time, Western thought has been dominated by
Descartes rather than Montaigne and Shakespeare. It is easy to see that standard-
ization is well adapted to a Cartesian world. Standards are abstract, written rules
which apply to many cases; the facts of each case are considered less important.


STANDARDIZATION AND EXPERT KNOWLEDGE 41

In pre-modern times, according to Giddens (1990), individuals both in principle
and in practice could ‘ignore the pronouncements of priests, sages, and sorcerers,
and get on with the routines of daily activity. But this is not the case in the mod-
ern world, in respect of expert knowledge.’ (Giddens 1990, p. 84). Just doing
things has become increasingly complicated. We need more and more rational jus-
tification and documentation for what we plan to do and what we have done.
Expert knowledge is all around us and hard to avoid. Experts play a major role in
organizations and societies.

Admittedly, arguments along these lines do not go unchallenged. In a humorous
vein, it has been said that an expert is someone who makes all of his mistakes in a
limited area and according to precise rules. We also find warnings about the dangers
of expert dominance: the allegedly technical and objective knowledge of experts IS
said to eclipse, partly or totally, other ways of thinking and acting. It is considered
acceptable to allow expert opinion to govern, but only if the area is highly complex
and policy is undisputed. Otherwise, for example if there is disagreement on policy
or between different groups of experts, there will be difficulties. Thus, experts have
been viewed as both a solution and a problem. Nevertheless, in our opinion, the
growing importance of standardization is linked to a high degree of legitimacy for
those who are presumed to know more than the rest of us.

In this chapter we begin by discussing what kind of expert knowledge is said to
be embodied in standards. We emphasize that standards are expert knowledge
stored in the form of rules. We then point to the danger that groups of experts will
set their own agenda, often claiming a scientific basis for their knowledge. This
basis in science is the foundation of their legitimacy, although in reality the scien-
tific connection may be quite tenuous. We then discuss how it is possible that stan-
dardizers may sometimes be very influential but usually need not answer to anyone.

In the discussion that follows, we relate standardization to the role of experts in
modern societies. The expert knowledge stored in standards has tended to become
increasingly important and, at least in the social sciences, that expertise has not been
rightfully recognized. But not all experts are standardizers; some are not involved
in standardization at all. And it is debatable whether all standardizers should be con-
sidered experts. Some of those that we call standardizers have often been criticized
precisely for their lack of expert knowledge.

Rules as a store of expert knowledge

Standards are created by groups of people who develop solutions which they regard
as good for all concerned. While people are involved in this process, they are not
of primary importance. A significant feature of standards and standardization is that
expert knowledge 18. stored in rules and in technical solutions. Knowledge is trans-
formed into rules that are abstract, general, and recorded in writing. Standards are
de-contextualized in space and time. However, some kinds of knowledge are not
easily stored in this manner. We seldom find in standards what we call knowledge

through familiarity, or ‘tacit knowledge’, and knowledge of individual cases.


A WORLD OF STANDARDS
42

| ihe neans the only way to store expert knowledge. FOr exam.
Standards are by å sed ‘11 other rules besides standards. Binding rules may be
considered a product of gradually distilled pear hae to
directives, expert knowledge 1s related ages to era ae | i | inter.
preted. The experts in this domain are not on å dr ? on , ete i efence
attorneys; they are also legal counsellors in the ar y | eng G ve . hi fo].
low without question are often considered to ag ody Pe an now.
ledge possessed by everyone. But we do not usually assoc Xperts with norms
> rule need no interpreters.
arken IS dte machines. Using a aoa oe not require
any technical knowledge whatever. In such cases It IS op at those with the
know-how—the experts—agree on what I to be stored in the machines and on
the way in which it is to be stored. Co-ordination and technical compatibility
require standardization that provides a certain degree of homogeneity. There may
be competing systems for computers, video recorders, and the like, but preferably
not too many. Much of what we refer to as technical standardization is related to

ple, knowledge c

this issue. |
We normally think of expert knowledge as being stored in human beings, not in

rules or machines. Most people will realize that they are dealing with an expert
when they talk with someone who has mastered a body of abstract knowledge,
such as a physician, a therapist, or an accountant. Sometimes this knowledge has
been developed within a profession. Professional groups exercise their profession
on the basis of knowledge acquired through years of professional education. Their
competence is considered so advanced and special that it cannot be evaluated or
controlled by persons without the same education and the same access to research.
The exercise of the profession is governed by the professional’s own definition of
the problem and manner of reaching conclusions, and it should be characterized by
autonomy and responsibility (Abbott 1988).

Science and academic disciplines are customarily considered to be the principal
form of storing expert knowledge in modern societies. Professional groups are also
linked to higher learning; they are surrounded with an aura of knowledge, and
what they say is considered extremely credible. Commissions, investigations, tele-
vised debates, etc. often go to great lengths to involve scientific or academic exper-
tise that will give them an aura of legitimacy. Science now exercises a dominating
influence on a growing number of spheres in our lives; today we have scientific
expert knowledge—and by extension, standards—in everything from how to clean
toilets, how to feel better, how to shield ourselves from noise, to how to manage
companies.

Stull another repository for expert knowledge is organizations. Society has become
increasingly organized. Organizations develop directives for their internal func-

tioning, and special procedures that are routinely followed; some even maintain
that organizations create their own cultures. It is not easy to distinguish the know-

ledge stored in organizations from the knowledge stored in its people and
machines, yet in modern society some of the conflicts that people experience may


STANDARDIZATION AND EXPERT KNOWLEDGE 43

well be between their own (professional or scientific) knowledge and that of the
organization. For as we have noted, the exercise of a profession is governed neither
by organizational culture nor by the particular rules of an organization.

In discussing different types of expert groups, Reed (1996) distinguishes between
experts in independent/liberal professions, such as physicians, architects, and
lawyers, and those in so-called organizational professions like managers, adminis-
trators, and technicians. These two distinct types of expert group are assumed to
differ as to their knowledge base, their power strategy, and their form of organiza-
tion. The classic independent professions are based on abstract, codified, cos-
mopolitan, and rational knowledge acquired substantially from academic disciplines
and through academic education. These professions follow a strategy of monopo-
lization, and their form of organization is based on collegiality.

As for the organizational professions, their expert knowledge relates to the devel-
opment of the organization. According to Reed, it is founded on technical, tacit,
local, and political knowledge, its strategy is not one of monopolization but of cre-
dentialism (the importance of academic degrees, positions of authority, etc.), and its

form of organization is bureaucracy. In our opinion, Reed probably underestimates
the degree of general and abstract knowledge also present in areas which are more

specific to organizations. Abbott (1988) has described this kind of knowledge as
more craftsmanlike. Despite its rather fragmented character, we will show that man-
agement and organizations are becoming increasingly subject to standardization.
The third group of experts identified by Reed is what he terms ‘knowledge
workers’. By these he means financial and business consultants, IT experts, and
others who possess a kind of specialized expertise based on a much less clearly
defined knowledge base. In their work they use a combination of theoretical
knowledge, analytical tools, and knowledge of a more esoteric nature. They are

entrepreneurs who carve out their own space in markets and act through networks.
We would definitely call some of these experts standardizers, but to a greater extent

than Reed we emphasize the similarities rather than the differences between the
three groups of experts.

The scientific bases of standards

In practice, these different ways of storing expert knowledge are thus interwoven.
For example, standardization is strongly based on academic disciplines, is linked to
professions, and is often directed at organizations. Standardization of the physical
world (encompassing flora, fauna, minerals, planets, stars, clouds, etc.) was pre-
ceded by rapid progress towards standardization in the natural sciences. There was
a similar development, though later and more gradual, in the social sciences (Meyer
1997). The twentieth century has witnessed the emergence and proliferation of
general models relating to human beings, societies, and organizations. In Meyer's
view, science seems to have a pre-eminent role in explaining the expansion and

diffusion of standardization. More and more fields of society are being treated as
sciences and then subjected to standardization.


44 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

7 4 p 7 d CX |; |
According to Meyer, the strong position of the sciences may explain the volun.
CCC kh & 5 .

tary character of standardization: The a". per hen fone 20,
simply doing reasonable social action given the prio - 2 øy: d scien.
tized context’ (Meyer 1997, p. 11). He emphasizes o je" 0 wines
ing between academic knowledge, on the one ae me : - opment
industry’ of professional, international, and nationa Figen *, ON the other
which often follow in the wake of academic knowledge. T c den of the Jat.
ter group require the existence of science and academic at ines, oa need not
be particularly consistent with them. Science gives actions egitimacy. Turning an
area into a science creates a basis for its standardization.

We examine this ‘development industry’ 1n some of the later chapters of this
book, for example in the discussion on standards for the management, control, and
quality assurance of organizations. We treat academic knowledge, especially in the
area of management, as a standardizer distinct from a number of others. In disci-
plines such as management, economics, and political science, the boundary
between academics and standardizers does not seem very clear. It is shown in

i, Chapter 5 that the relationship between standards for management and those for
\ | research on business has long been quite tenuous. Here, too, the movement for
yey standardization seems to be based on knowledge that apparently lacks a solid sci-
entific foundation, although it may claim such a foundation as a ground for legiti-

\
AN macy (Giddens 1990).

In this way we can see that storing expert knowledge in the form of standards js

not unrelated to other ways of developing expert knowledge. Admittedly, the

expert knowledge generated by professional groups may be incorporated to a lar

ge
extent in standards, but it often includes elements which are not easily written

down. If standardization is carried too far, as with systems of medical expertise, it
may even be viewed as a threat to professional expert knowledge. The claims to
special knowledge by professional groups have a kind of ‘sacred quality’ that is hard

to reconcile with requiring that everything be put in writing. It may be added that
professionals as a category are experts who apply their kn
unlike many standardizers who work more at a distance.

N
NN
N

owledge in practice,

Standards as technical expert knowledge

People who regard themselves as producers of standards r
nical standardization’. What do we mean when we say

technical? We certainly do not mean that it is Casy to agree on the optimal solu-

tion. The development of standards may also involve substantial conflict, for exam-
ple between companies with different interests, or |

acceptance for different quality systems. |

users, standardization may have major consequences for the competitive position
of the standardizers. In spite of the aura of objectivity surrounding standardization,

and behind the facade of technical expert knowledge, there may be considerable
disagreement in practice.

efer to their work as ‘tech-
that expert knowledge is


STANDARDIZATION AND EXPERT KNOWLEDGE 45

Knowledge of management and quality previously resided to a substantial extent
in individuals and has been transmitted through professions and scholarship. Now
that it is being subjected to standardization, partly through the growth of academic
knowledge, it will be increasingly embodied in rules. Once traditional standardiz-
ing organizations involve themselves in regulating quality and management sys-
tems, these matters are treated as technical. Here we may find an explanation for

why form and procedures are considered more important than content and pur-
pose. As an illustration, quality in medical_care t ay may sometimes be related /

more to whether objectives, procedures, and documentation conform to some

senn - ee pr rf .

standard, than to whether good medical care is being provided.

Technical standards are being introduced in more and more areas. One of these
areas is quality, as we show in Part 2 of this book. A partial explanation 1s the need
for control and supervision, which follows from a reliance on decentralized sys-
tems. Delegation calls for control, which in turn necessitates supervision; the latter
is simplified when interpersonal contact is not required. Naturally, it is easier for a
labour inspectorate (responsible for supervising work safety) to review documen-
tation on a workplace than to examine the workplace physically. An on-site inspec-
tor must travel and put up with all kinds of problems, whereas so-called systems
supervision can be done at a desk.

It appears as if much of the control in society 1s concerned with whether organ-
izational units have the right procedures and produce the right documents, rather

—— ee ~ ers saree — mn

than whether they are actually doing something differently. For example, organi-

zations in Sweden with more than ten employees must have a plan for equal treat-
ment of men and women, even though most people would probably hold that such
a plan is no guarantee of equal treatment. Documentation of this kind, which 1s
often based on standards, is easy to review. The need for review thus leads to the
production of documents that can be reviewed (Power 1997). Perhaps decentral-

‘vation and the creation of autonomous units are giving rise to a demand for stan-
dards which would permit the examination of them as autonomous units.

There must be a way to exercise control over units that are defined as separate
and autonomous. Standards make organizations visible and possible to control and
audit. When standards are assumed to embody what the experts have found to be
best—that is, treated as technical in nature—it may be held that this control is
objective and non-controversial. This does not mean that there is no need for
people. A whole new industry has emerged in the service sector, populated by
armies of consultants, accountants, certifiers, accreditors, etc. who are charged with
applying and interpreting standards.

Even greater are the problems of describing standardization in the European
Union (EU) as merely a codification of expert knowledge. In the EU, private stan-
dardizing organizations have been given å major role in ‘filling out’ very generally
worded directives in areas such as health, safety, and environmental protection
(Bundgard-Pedersen 1997). Some kinds of rules that were previously considered
politically important are now set by the European standardizing organizations, and
thus by experts who might be representatives of companies, interest groups, Or


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

46

| i mø Pt these standards became -
blic agencies. By being linked to directives, 16, in Ome
public age -

were andatory.

-ases, virtually mal | qa danger that so=-c; |
it ster reliance on standards may — ‘ | I d politic a echnical

sth ledge will become a substitute for ethica pp or ICal discourse. This
expert knowle » domain of standardizat; |
i becomes increasingly relevant as the do Sn en aon EXPands
| : one— Is
There will be a growing focus on how wae ge tap ing] on form rather
| tent. Another reason Why standardization has increasingly concerned
than content.

| 7 Pro.
cedure rather than substance 1s the combination of the growing importance Of stan.
€

ee ‘43 ic of self-interest. Organizations are incre;
dardization and the prevailing ethic TS åre It singly

å . : nn
doing what is in their own best interests. dardization with
cc sere ve ustify standardizatio arguments relat

—Thus, while attempts are made to jusair ps |
ing to technique, rationality, and optimality, and with the arn that experts
develop solutions that benefit everyone, a much more complex view of the te fi

nical sphere is emerging. In this book we seek to show why it is important to

study the Standardizers, and thereby to understand what is meant byråer know
f standardization besides its

ledge. There is also another interesting aspect O

; ndards to cre |
allegedly technical nature: namely, the power of standards to create order with.

out responsibility.
iia t

Expert knowledge, the voluntary nature of standards, and responsibility

In professions and in the sciences it is easy to link responsibility to certain individ-
uals, to the professional or to the researcher who is personally responsible for devel-
oping the expert knowledge. But the impersonal and voluntary character of
standards complicates the issue of responsibility. The impersonal aspect is manifest

ger

in the references to written texts rather than to the ethical values of a particular

Rey Oe Pee err ary Tet ot ieee Coe ee) tase t ae a

individual or to professional or political considerations. The voluntary aspect—no

ee es Pe tee SP ie © SU Å LE se

hi at one is forced to follow a standard—makes it relatively easy for those who draft stan-
| mT dards to disclaim responsibility.

Tie | One reason why the voluntary character of standards fosters a kind of irrespon-
sibility among standardizers has to do with the mechanisms for feedback. Since
standards are voluntary, the mechanism for feedback is ineffective. In other words,

Par ees eet nå

* . . + . — op
anyone who is dissatisfied will tend to ‘exit’ from the standard and choose another
AO DL EE ae GT erat ee ee

one next.me, rather than ‘voice’ a complaint about the standard causing the dis-
satisfaction (compare Hirschman 1972). There 1s little incentive to complain, and
little incentive to try to change the rule. The case of directives is different; these
often include very explicit rules for appealing against decisions.

This is a special feature of the expert knowledge embodied in standards, which
distinguishes it from other forms of expert knowledge. In the sciences there are
well-developed systems for expressing criticism: in professions there are often quite
specific procedures for filing complaints and for determining whether there has
been unprofessional conduct. In the case of standards, however, not only is there
often little incentive to complain; there may not be any established procedure for

doing so, either. These two factors are of course related.


STANDARDIZATION AND EXPERT KNOWLEDGE 47

Standardizers seem to grow noticeably apprehensive as soon as standards (as in
the EU) are linked to directives; an example would be the provision of the EU
directive that manufacturers of machinery are to follow the ISO 9000 standard.
Suddenly there is no longer any choice as to the manner of complying with the
directive. Anyone dissatisfied with the standard now has a powerful incentive to
complain to those who have developed the standard or are in the process of revis-

ing it. And the standardizers will find it difficult to disclaim responsibility now that
the formerly voluntary standard has become a mandatory directive.

In spite of such tendencies, standardizers appear essentially disinclined to assume
responsibility. Expert knowledge is ‘stored’ in the standard and not in any person.
No one need follow the standard against his or her will. Standardizers are seldom

held to account for what they do. Thus, one may say that standardization is a sys-

© ew bd pm.

tem in which responsibility is both fragmented and diluted, Not surprisingly,

° i erate PA aa på ; i N p : :
people who like markets also seem to like standardization. Regulation is considered

more adapted to the needs of the market, if done by standardizers than by centres
of power with more legal authority.

The growing importance of standardization in the EU is related to the creation
of a free market. Many decisions in the EU develop through transnational networks
involving several different levels and actors in both the public and the private sec-
tor. I he EU Commission relies frequently on the expert knowledge found in com-
panies, interest groups, the civil service of member countries, etc. There is an
extensive interchange of information and views among companies, interest groups,
and civil servants—and less among politicians. The explanation for this is partly that
efforts to promote integration in the EU have focused primarily on the economy
and the creation of an internal market.

The legitimacy of EU decision making to a large extent derives from the idea of
a free market. Decisions are limited to areas where they are essential for guarantee-
ing a market. Its legitimacy is also based on the utility of markets. It is authorized
because it is performed by experts who make good decisions in their respective
fields, much as classic technical standardization is justified on the ground that it is
good for everyone. The legitimacy of these decisions is based on the assumption
that the sector networks in which they emerge are best at solving the problems that
may arise. It is less important to know who 1s speaking on behalf of whom than
who possesses the necessary knowledge.

It is interesting in this connection that in the EU matters pertaining to health,
safety, and the environment have been largely delegated to European standardizing
organizations—that is, to private organizations with thousands of standardizing
groups at different levels that include actors from both the public and private sec-
tors. The stated goal is to find the best solution, the one that is good for all con-
cerned. Decisions are legitimated by expert knowledge, but it is always difficult to
regard expert knowledge as neutral. In practice standards are used by companies as
a major competitive instrument.

Politicians in the member countries of the EU assume responsibility for the

entire system of rules which has been designed to make the internal EU market a


<<  Eee—

”
i

PV
/ Al )
\ f

A WORLD OF STANDARDS
48

| large
lity. Constant changes 1n this system of rules are (a gely by comm
reality. Cons he from politics. In Sweden, to take op
7 moved from p C ex
standardizing groups far ren | safety actually meant was previond. JP
the i nation of what occupational satety Ithouch in br Ou:
> determil ul IN prinec;3
mi d to employer associations and trade unions, altho : Principle p
ld anaes Now decisions in this area have largely been tyr
could always 1 ge
ial groups of experts; 1€ 1s difficult to ae an belongs
to trans 4 how they function. The politicians remain responsible, but
groups and h 4
“1T ] nce has been reduced. |
ee from a situation where elected officials even kø med
We are thus moving away ular issues; Forméshi,-wh Prin-
ciple could assume responsibility on particular ISSUES. y, When there Was 2
pr that decisions would lack legitimacy, the usual response was politica] Inter.
anger | hi |
"bil: rtailed. The critica] |
vention, but now that possibility has been cu inal UESstion jg
, Dr ao | national processe |
whether, and how, decision making 1n these trans ; p | S pr be given
is oO create a European state wit
legitimacy. One way of course would be t p the same

authority that its constituent members previously possessed as nation-states In the

absence of a European state, standardization would still appear to help provide CO-
ordination.

Ittee

O Itciang

to thes .

Standardization may be regarded as a way of regulating ina situation where there
is no legal centre of authority. We will have a kind of symbolic and secularized

society based on the premise that people voluntarily conform to the

cht A tnt i decisions of
° . ..'s oo. eee mag EE er
authorized expert knowledge. But while order is being established, respo

nsibility
. . —_——r sa
may be vanishing.

Standardization, expert knowledge, and the Cartesian heritage

The emergence of groups—transnational and even global—with authorized expert
knowledge has its dangers. Experts form their own groups that set their own agen-

das and often claim a scientific basis for their knowledge. They derive their legiti-

macy from being associated with academia, even though the relationship in practice

may be quite tenuous. In our opinion, it is important to cast the spotlight on this
group of standardizers; at least sometimes they are ina position to exert substantial

influence, while generally not having to answer to anyone.
In the literature on international organizations, these groups have been called
‘epistemic communities’; defined by Haas (1990)

as groups ‘composed of profes-
sionals . . . who share a commitment to a common

causal model and a common set
of political values. They are united by a belief in the truth of their model and by a

commitment to translate this truth into public policy,

welfare will be enhanced as a result’ (p. 41). Their claim to knowledge extends both
to procedures and to content. The

link with the sciences is strongly emphasized.
The importance of these expert groups 1s contrasted with habit-driven action,
which in our frame of reference would probably be termed action regulated by
norms,

in the conviction that human

Researchers in this area are mostl

y concerned with explaining why organizations
and nation-states

often find it so difficult to accept the advice and ideas developed


STANDARDIZATION AND EXPERT KNOWLEDGE 49

by these experts. It appears that the knowledge developed by so-called epistemic
communities has not been given nearly enough influence in a political process
characterized largely by inertia and habit-driven action. Experts are sometimes
called in, but usually when politicians find that it serves their own purposes, in time

of crisis, or when there are obviously better solutions elsewhere that can be
imported.

Part of the solution, according to Haas, is to be found in science; the language

of science can function as 4 transideological and transcultural signification system’
(p. 46). We find it somewhat naive to view the role of science and of experts in

this way. Instead, we have called attention to a number of major problems related

to standardization, which stem from reliance on experts: depoliticization, techni-

calization, and the emergence of regulation without responsibility. Standardization
is important as a form of co-ordination and control in modern societies. Growing
standardization will probably be accompanied by a greater role for experts 1n reg-
ulating society.

In this chapter we have called attention to the importance of expert knowledge
in standardization, and to the kind of knowledge expressed in standards. We have
emphasized the link between science and standardization, as well as the relation-
ship between standardization, its voluntary character, and the absence of responsi-
bility for it. We may conclude that the road that we travel takes us from Descartes
to the ISO 9000 procedures (which is our focus in Chapter 5). All the same, it 1s
worth asking, with Toulmin, whether there might not have been another road,
narrower and probably more winding, but an alternative nevertheless—a road that
would have led us from Shakespeare to stories and tales with a more specific, local

a ck nn

character, and more in tune with what or dually emerges over time.

we OLVE


4

Standardizing through Organization

ga ret) oe ee

GÖRAN AHRNE, NILS BRUNSSON, AND CHRISTINA GARSTEN

I don't want to belong to any club that will accept me as a member (Marx 1959).

Introduction

The task of standardizers is to influence others. Others should follow their stan.
dards. but how many will do so is uncertain. Standardizers have few means of
influencing others; they have only their standards and arguments in favour of these

Standardizers may be tempted to try other ways of exerting influence. They can

id themselves to acton other than the would-be adopters; they may be able to
persuade a third party with power or authonty to try to Convince others to follow
the standards. For example, standardizers may try to convince large industrial buy-
ers that they should require their supphers to be cerutied according to some qual-
ity standard, or lognlaton could be persuaded to imtroduce a standard into national
legislation. Another method to try to achieve monopoly status within a certain
area of standards. This » a clear ambinon among standards organizations such ag
ISO or CEN, although they by no means always succeed.

A third method to relate more closely to adopters. This strategy (for some
examples of which see Chapter 8) involves giving those who follow standards sym-
bolic rewards or helping them in unplemenning their standards. Standardizers may
also establish cerahicabon organizabons and initiate practices for monitonng indi-
vidual cases of umplementanon of standards.

A further method whereby standardizers may increase the hkehhood that their
standards will be adopted 1 to create å formal organization, whose members must
follow the standards. This method involves very close relations with adopters, and
represents a border case between standardizanon and regulation by means of a for-
mal organizanon. The organizanon 1s created with the purpose of supporting cer-

tain standards, but by choosing this method the standardizers have become
organizational leaders rather than standardizers in the onginal sense. The standards

previously directed to others in general have become directives for the members of
this new organizanon. Compliance with these directives is voluntary since mem-
bership ts voluntary, but, for membership, it is mandatory.

For example, the United Nations may be said to have been formed in order to
make states follow rules of non-aggression and respect for human nghts. The UN


STANDARDIZING THROUGH ORGANIZATION 51

was created as an organization with these rules in its statutes and tried to enrol every

state as a member. This strategy is clearly different from that used by Amnesty
International, which tries to influence the global human rights situation mainly by
issuing Open standards, and by carrying out certain certifying procedures.

We term organizations, formed in the way described above, standard-based
organizations. T'o become a member one has to follow certain rules, so member-

ship is based on similarity. This is different from many other organizations which
may prefer dissimilarity among their members: an industrial company needs organ-
izational members with different areas of competence and experience in order to

ensure that, jointly, they produce a good product. Some standard-based organiza-
tions organize individuals. Members of a national Bar Association must have a cer-

tain education and professional experience. Others organize other organizations.
For instance, in trade organizations all the affiliated companies manufacture the
same type of products, and the members of FIFA are national football leagues,
which play football according to certain standards. Whether individuals or organi-
zations, members of standard-based organizations tend to value a certain degree of
autonomy; and standard-based organizations are normally able to influence only
part of their members’ activities.

There are two ways of viewing the formation of standard-based organizations,
both of which make such organizations of interest to students of standardization.
They can be seen as the end and opposite of standardization; as the point when stan-
dardization ends and formal organization begins. According to this view, those
wanting to influence others can choose either standardization or organization. Some
standardizers choose to become leaders of standard-based organizations. The crucial
issues then become how we can understand the choice of one form rather than
another, as discussed in Chapter 2, and how we can explain the transition from stan-
dardization to formal organization, an issue that is discussed later in this chapter.

Alternatively, the transition from traditional standardization to standard-based
organization can be seen in a less dramatic way, as representing both discontinuity
and continuity—as a way of standardizing but with other means. One reason for
this perspective is the fact that many standard-based organizations not only turn to
directives but continue to produce standards for their members, since these value
their autonomy too highly to accept more than a limited set of directives. For
instance, over the years the UN has produced a great many standards for modern
states in fields such as education, labour, politics, and preservation of nature (Meyer
1987). In addition, a standard-based organization may well act as a traditional stan-
dardizer, producing standards for non-members.

Another, more fundamental reason for considering the creation of a standard-
based organization as a continuity is that it can be seen as just another step in stan-
dardizers’ attempts to organize their environment. In this case we let the concept
of organization represent order and co-ordination rather than the institution of for-
mal organization (as defined in Chapter 2). Organizing in this sense means to use
various instruments of co-ordination (Brunsson and Olsen 1998). Such instruments

include the power to include or exclude members, rule setting, common resources,


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

52
9 issue directives and orders (Ahrne 1994), Th;

! izing, alt! |
tandardization as representing one Way of organ > 7 10ugh a fair]
sees sti | “ind:
the only instrument being a set of non binding rules a are not co
one, |
with an authoritative Centre or with much concentration of resources.

om ita
organization, ON the other hand, ct rin,
So when standardizers create 4

stronger means for organizing.
Standard-based organizations OP

and a centre with authority t
Mbineq

Å forma

rate 1n organizational fields (DiMaggio Nå

Powell 1983; see also Chapter 1). To understand how organizational fields fine:
tion, it is necessary to understand processes of standardization in general and the

creation and working of standard-based organizations in particular. Fields can bis
more or less organized. There are sets of common rules, for instance standards and

laws, regulating exchange and interaction. Such rules can create high degrees åå
uniformity among organizations in the field. Fields often include a certain hierar.

chical structure, with some inspection bodies being able to use sanctions against
those who do not comply with directives. Compliance with standards may be
checked by certifying bodies. The formal organizations that organize individuals or
organizations in the field may be few or many, strong or weak.

When standardizers create a standard-based organization they change the
organization of the field as a whole. They try to acquire more control over the
field. With their formal organization standardizers get access to more organizing
instruments than they had when they only used standards, and their potential to
influence and organize others is increased. Standardizers cannot normally enrol all
actors in the field in their organization, however; there will be individuals and
organizations outside those that are formally organized.

The control that a standard-based organization has over a field varies, but the
existence of such an organization may be of great importance for field dynamics.
In order to analyse the interaction, distribution of power, and degree of uniformity
in organizational fields it is necessary to understand the structure and dynamics of
standard-based organizations.

In discussing standardization through the formation of standard-based organiza-
tions we look at how, and to what extent, standardizers get their standards adopted
and implemented by creating formal organizations. Many organizations can be seen
as standard-based organizations, the creation of which could be interpreted as the
choice of formal organization over traditional standardization or as a transition from

sional organizations, trade associations, interest organizations, and a large number
of international government and non-government organizations such as the UN,
the OECD, the EU, the International Olympic Committee, and the World Union
of Free Universities. To illustrate our discussion, we examine three fairly recently
formed standard-based organizations, in three different fields. All are formal orga-
nizations of organizations, that is, their members are other organizations. A short

description of each is given below. (Some names and other factual details have been
changed, to ensure anonymity.)


STANDARDIZING THROUGH ORGANIZATION 53

Three standard-based organizations

The Association for European Schools of Technology (ASTE) is a co-

operative organization, founded in 1988 and consisting of approximately ten lead-

ing universities of technology in Europe and 30 companies. ASTE has as its aim to

train future company leaders, equipping them with the skills they need to work
internationally, that is, to foster individuals who can understand and adapt to dif-
ferent cultures, who can work in several languages, and who are knowledgeable
about European and international professional procedures. The aim is to develop
and harmonize European technical training at the university level. The schools
offer a joint degree, an ASTE Masters, which is based on four to five years of uni-

versity-level studies. In order to take this type of degree a student must take certain
courses available at all of the member schools, have certain linguistic abilities, and
take one semester of courses at a member school other than the Alma Mater.
Schools desiring to join the network are carefully evaluated with reference to their
education standards and international profile. Only one school per country, the
‘best’, is approved for membership in ASTE, and the schools must comply with the
basic rules regarding international emphasis and quality. ASTE evolved very
quickly at the beginning, despite certain misgivings among outsiders regarding a
joint degree, growing from four member schools to 12 within four years. ASTE
determines what an ASTE Masters degree is, and regulates certain aspects of the
education programme, such as what courses should be offered to students and how
studies abroad are to be conducted. However, ASTE has no further rules for
how the member schools are to be set up or how they are to conduct their teach-
ing.

SPUR (Swedish Association of Temporary Work Businesses and
Staffing Services) is a Swedish national trade association of companies specializ-
ing in providing temporary staff, and has the official purpose of ‘working for high
quality, ethical rules and a healthy personnel policy in the temporary employment
business’. At the time of writing, 14 companies are affiliated with SPUR, and mem-
ber organizations work actively to recruit new members. A few larger companies
dominate the temporary employment business, and it was the head officers of a
couple of these who set up SPUR. Every member pays an annual fee to the associ-
ation, part of which pays for a consultant to help them in their contacts with other
actors in the labour market. Meetings of members are held biannually at which
information about new rules and events relevant to business operations are dissem-
inated. SPUR offers training related to new employment constraints. Knowledge
of the regulatory framework and of similar methods of working is considered
important. On the member companies’ initiative, SPUR has developed ethical
rules to be used in-house, in relations between managers and associates, and exter-
nally in customer relations and marketing. SPUR has also set up an ethical council
to monitor compliance with the rules, even by non-members. The council func-

tions as a type of court, to which employees, customers, and member companies
can report members who do not comply with the ethical rules. SPUR has its own


A WORLD OF STANDARDS
54

ber companies use, for instance in advertisemen,
. ; - S, as
that they are serious and as an assurance of providing quality, |

IBF is the Swedish Floor Ball Federation and was founded in 198> 28 part
S | door ball recognized as a top-level sport. The game has Dine sms
move to get floo ea

pi dish), a game played on ;
a D G ‘ld hockey ( bandy in Swe | | Ice On
ities to so-called pe fri loor båll:a similar stick'and ball are tied ay
C

ne is played indoors, not on ice. The literal translation of the Swedish Word ¢
dot bal i indoor bandy”. A student handball enthusiast introduced flog, ee

Sweden at the end of the 1960s. Floor ball became popular among handball play.
ers, among students and at schools. By the end of the 1970s floor ball wag aN estab.

lished form of exercise. Tournaments were used to popularize the Port. The fir
floor ball club, formed with the intention of making floor ball a Serious, élite Sport
played on a large court, was founded in the Swedish town of Sala in 1979 At the
same time the hunt was on for other teams to play against. The Sala Club required
that opposing teams play according to their rules. To begin with, Considerable
effort was put into finding opponents. An inner circle of six clubs was slowly
formed which together continued the process of setting rules. They sought mem.
bership of the Swedish federation for bandy clubs but it would not accept floor ball
clubs as a subdivision. Therefore they formed the Swedish Floor Ball Association
This association continued the work of regulating the sport and setting up cham-
pionship tournaments. The association was replaced by the Swedish Floor Ball
Federation in 1981. The association became affiliated with the Swedish Sports
Confederation. New clubs were quickly created. There were 1,500 clubs in 1995.
The number of players increased from 500 in the beginning of the 1980s to more
than 60,000 in the mid-1990s (Liljeros, 1996).

The Swedish Sports Confederation requires that a sport represented in their
organization be internationally recognized. The first international floor bal] game
between Sweden and Finland was played in 1985, and the International Floor Ball
Association, consisting of three members, was founded in 1986. Ten years later
there were 13 member countries and that same year the first world championship
floor ball games were played.

Organizations such as ASTE, SPUR, and SIBF are important rule setters, and,
unlike traditional standardizers, they are able to issue some directives for their
members as well as standards for both members and non-members. In the follow-
ing discussion we examine all these rules and the difference that the introduction
of formal organization makes to rule setting and control, compared to traditional

standardization. But first it is important to investigate why standard-based organi-
zations are set up at all, and why they attract members.

emblem, which the men

with sticks and a 1

al] into

The creation of standard-based organizations

The impact of standard-based organizations is many-sided. Standard-based organi-
zations May give actors a certain status or they facilitate interaction, co-operation,
and exchange between actors. A standard-based organization may also serve [0


STANDARDIZING THROUGH ORGANIZATION 55

advance the common interests of those who follow certain standards. All of these
effects may be more likely to appear within a formal organization than when there
are open standards only. Standardizers and others with an interest in such effects
tend to support the creation and existence of standard-based organizations. Also, by
forming an organization standardizers may expect to gain more control over those

who follow their standards. How much control they actually achieve, however, is
a different issue, to be discussed later.

Status

Standardization is generally expected to improve things: a standard is something
good, and usually the best. The standards one has to follow in order to become a
member of a standard-based organization may be distinctive and highly regarded.
One reason for forming and joining a standard-based organization is that the orga-
nization gives its members a certain status and identity that differentiate them from
other actors in the field. Certain standards have to be followed in order to qualify
for membership, and by being accepted as a member in an organization that has
certain standards, the members show that they meet these standards. Through
membership in a professional organization one demonstrates that one is indeed a
professional of a certain kind. Often at least some of the standards one has to fol-
low in order to become a member are highly valued in society in general, thus giv-
ing the members a high status. The statement by Groucho Marx, quoted at the start
of this chapter, can be interpreted as meaning that this gentleman only wanted to

belong to élite, high-status organizations, clubs with such high standards that they
would not accept Mr Marx as a member.

The organization’s right to choose its members seems to provide a guarantee that
members do indeed meet its standards. And the organization’s formal right to con-

trol parts of members’ activities seems to provide further guarantees. Standard-
based organizations give credence to members’ claim to status and legitimacy. The
status that a standard-based organization can give to its members may have a oreater
impact than anything that individual members could possibly achieve on their own
by claiming adherence to open standards. In this way standard-based organizations
contribute to status differentiation within the field.

Membership in ASTE is a sign that a university of technology is the best in its
country and that it has an international profile. One of the purposes of creating
SIBF was to force the Swedish Sports Confederation to recognize floor ball. The
founders of SIBF emphasized that they were dealing with élite floor ball as differ-
entiated from unregulated, amateur floor ball. One important motive behind the
creation of SPUR was to show that the members complied with state laws and
common norms; thereby differentiating the serious member companies from the
less serious companies in the temporary employment business.

Sometimes membership in standard-based organizations not only provides status
and high credibility. It also may be constitutional, that is, membership becomes a
prerequisite for being seen as a certain type of individual or organization. In some


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

56

countries, it is only through membership of the national Bar Association th

can acquire all the rights necessary (0 ee , pp in SIBE N
necessary for a club to be considered for élite og : —— SPUR desire
to play a role in the formation of a new type © er y , temporary employ.
ment agency—which has certain tasks and metho da = on. Through aff.
tion with SPUR a member company can describe itself as such a company

Membership thereby provides a signal to those who lack detailed knowledg eof;
specific member company and its operations. The standard-based organization pro.

vides members with a specific identity.

Interaction

Another important role that a standard-based organization can play is to facilitate
interaction and exchange between members, and this role may be the main reason
for forming the organization. Clubs that belong to the Swedish Floor Ball
Federation can play with each other since they follow the same rules. The stan-

dardized ASTE courses make it possible for students to study similar courses abroad
to those at their home universities. It makes 1t easier to combine courses taken at

home with those taken abroad, and to count all the courses towards a degree.

Student exchange is thereby facilitated.
A standard-based organization is often able to regulate interaction more closely

than if interaction is regulated by open standards only. For instance, in situations of
strong competition, firms may easily ignore open standards; while a trade associ-
ation can be more efficacious in regulating compeuton between member compa-
nies. That which is subject to common rules cannot be subject to competition; that
which is not subject to common rules is, therefore, lett open to competition. The
ethical rules in SPUR regulate the relanonship between members and their cus-
tomers and employees, and proper markeung conduct (ct. Boddewyn 1983). This
is done to avoid compennon through ‘unethical’ means. Compeution is relegated
to areas that are not the subject of common rules, for instance price setting and the
exact design of the services offered by the vanous firms. In other trade associations
accounting systems are made uniform among members, which may lead to com-
mon principles for price setting and little overall compeution (Danielsson 1983).

Thus, standard-based orgamzations not only contribute to uniformity but also
create free zones for diversity. The diversity allowed is also regulated, however.
The organizations regulate where uniformity should hold and where variation may
be allowed. To be allowed to play floor ball, one has to follow the rules of the
game. But a clever player also knows how to stretch the limits of what is permissi-
ble in a creative way, to create unexpected situations. And some fundamental sim-
ilarities are necessary to enable the teams to compete. Similarity is a prerequisite for
judging dissimilanty, most importantly about who is best, that is, for the purpose
of allocating status.

Like all forms of standardization, standard-based organizations may also make
interaction more difficult, that is, interaction with those who are not members of


STANDARDIZING THROUGH ORGANIZATION 5/

the standard-based organization and do not follow its rules. When the floor ball
players were required to follow some specific rules, those who did not accept these
had to refrain from playing. The kind of football that was played at English public
schools in the middle of the nineteenth century without any set rules was also
beginning to be played in the United States at that time. After a few decades foot-
ball came to be standardized differently in England and in the United States, lead-
ing to the emergence of two widely different types of football, Association or
European Football and American football. These are regulated by different organi-
zations and cannot be played on the same field at the same time (Markovits 1988).

Working on behalf of members

A third role of standard-based organizations is to promote common goals. By asso-
ciating, the members can together become more powerful in their relations with
other parties. One of SPUR’s tasks is to defend its member companies’ shared inter-
ests by working on behalf of its members in contacts with other actors in the labour
market and influencing conditions for future developments in the temporary
employment industry.

Standard-based organizations can also increase the common resources of their
members. For example, through membership in SIBF individual clubs are entitled
to receive funding from the Swedish Sports Confederation and access to munici-
pal sports facilities.

Standard-based organizations can also save members from the imposition of
other rules, such as government directives: It is very likely that states would be
interested in regulating activities that now are regulated by some standard-based
organizations. SPUR was formed as an active—and successful—attempt to avoid
legislation regulating temporary employment agencies. To create a standard-based
organization in such a case is a way of demonstrating that legislation is unnecessary,
that the field of business is capable of self-regulation. It is more difficult to convince
states of this if there are open standards only. Threats of state involvement in a field
stimulate the creation of standard-based organizations. And such organizations
make not only state involvement but also other forms of external involvement
more difficult: if the EU wanted to set its own criteria for a European engineering
degree ASTE and its standards would be an obstacle.

Organizing fields

Standard-based organizations do not organize their members alone. They also orga-
nize the fields of which they are a part. They create field actors; they increase status
differentiation among actors; they affect what standards are set and accepted, they
influence the number and kinds of laws that regulate the field; they concentrate
resources to their advantage; and they reduce the influence of other organizations.

In all these ways, standard-based organizations also influence other characteris-

tics of a field. They influence co-operation and competition, and the degree and


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

58
ong actors IN å field. Some standard-based organization, SUG
il monopoly, so that actors who desire certain båter ‘

re may be substane;
ery to become members. In other fields, the | Å | a COmper;
ve to At ON) ing to recruit i
Y ene several etandard-based organizations ry 8 nin me same
a : . ' ' n c c
ve And the degree of control within the organizatio y Vary among Various
ers.

1 different fie ds and over time.

tandard-based organizations, I ‘fferent fields je

S A ‘ble alternative to forming a standard-based organization of organi
possi f

na field is for the potential member organizations to close un and then for
1
ne common organization instead, where the members are people instead of Org,
0

nizations—for example, to form one company instead of an associaton of Compa.
nies. Similarly, in principle one could try to form for instance one consulting fir

for a field rather than having independent consultants associated to a profess’ onal

association. This alternative seems particularly feasible for standardizers who expect

to achieve or who have achieved a monopoly for their standard-based Organiza.
tion. However, this option 1s not necessarily easy to meri The actors involved
may value their relative independence too greatly for that. T it vig also other rea-
sons why it may be desirable to retain a standard-based organization. iis

If the prime motivation for the formation of a standard-based organization is the
regulation of competition, as 1n the case of floor ball and SPUR, the element of
contest means that the interaction demands a multitude of actors. In such a sitya-
tion it would be inappropriate for the different individual organizations to cease to
exist and merge into one. It would be better for them to agree on standards, and
compete on equal terms.

In relation to status and legitimacy, the more exclusive the standards for entry to
the organization, the higher the status for the member. Even so there are com-
pelling arguments in favour of the formation of organizations with numerous
members, rather than a single body. The status of an ASTE-certified university in
Belgium could not be measured unless there were several other universities in other
nations, of the same rank, to confirm its position.

When there is a need to make status distinctions, to interact, or to work for
common goals, and these effects cannot be achieved by open standards, by state
regulation, or in other ways, standard-based organizations are likely to appear and
to survive. The formation of a specific standard-based organization is also depen-
dent on the existence of empty, social space—that there is not a similar organiza-
tion already in place. Both SPUR and SIBF are clear cases in point. It was in the
initial stages of the development of their respective fields that there was space for
such an organization. If a standard-based organization had already existed it would
have been much more difficult for SPUR or SIBF to become established. The
rules would already have been determined, and to designate different standards

and to gain ‘shares’ of the organizational field would have been much more dif-
ficult.

kind of uniformity arm
ceed in establishing å VITU

—


STANDARDIZING THROUGH ORGANIZATION 59

Recruiting members

ee FF Ta

| If a new standard-based organization and its rules are to gain strong influence in a

| field it must normally increase the number of members beyond the founders. If

there are few members, the degree of organization of the field remains low, and is
even lower than in fields with no standard-based or

ganizations but with widespread
standards.

Since it is not normally possible to enforce enrolment in standard-based
organizations, the number of members depends

on how many perceive future
value in that membership.

Becoming a member entails following certain rules and acknowledging similar-
ity with others. It is common for individuals and organizations to value other ideals
more highly than the conformity achieved through standardization (see Chapter 9).
The possession of special, and maybe even unique, characteristics is valued more
highly than standardized characteristics: being different is valued more highly than
being similar. It is therefore far from obvious that standard-based organizations
would have an easy time recruiting new members beyond the founders of the orga-
nization. What may induce others to become members?

The advantages to be gained from membership are similar to the purposes
behind the formation of the standard-based organization. Belonging to a standard-
based organization gives a member a certain status, facilitates interaction with
important others, or provides resources or protection.

In certain cases membership is the only way to gain access to these advantages.
It is difficult to run a floor ball association without the necessary financial backing
provided by membership in SIBF, and membership is necessary if a club wants to
play in a tournament. If SPUR’s logo becomes the quality assurance label that cus-
tomers want, it becomes almost impossible for non-member companies to gain
clients or customers. In such circumstances it will be hard to resist membership.
The standard-based organization has such strong control over the field that it is not
possible to act in a certain role without being a member. The rules of the standard-
based organization then become mandatory in practice.

So, even if the formation of a certain standard-based organization was not nec-
essary it can, nevertheless, become next to impossible not to join it once it has been
established. It is possible to conceive of SPUR, ASTE, or SIBF as not having been
created, but once they were created they found it easy to recruit members. In such
cases it is the formation of the organization that is the critical factor.

But it is not, of course, always necessary to become a member of a standard-
based organization. Sometimes the advantages offered by the standard-based orga-
nization may not be valued highly, or the advantages can be found elsewhere. In
such cases the disadvantages of membership can cause many to hesitate to join the
organization.

Membership is facilitated, however, if compliance with the rules of the organi-
zation is not especially taxing, or if organizations already comply with them; in such
a case they do not need to change their method of operating in order to become
members. Or the requirements may be negligible. ASTE course requirements were


A WORLD OF STANDARDS
60

'versitie *chnolo as
deliberately set so that most European universities of tec gy could have Joined

ASTE without making any major changes to as COU | y VE Rules gå
Iso be so broad or so vaguely formulated that the operations of many Potential
a & "

ith them.
members’ already comply wi | | |
It may also be easy for members to adapt to rules if compliance is not Costly or

controversial, nor does it affect many of the member's operations. Rules May, for

example, require a member organization to adopt a ethical Principles but
monitoring compliance may not be effective in practice. nstituting such Principles
is cheap and non-controversial, and does not disrupt operations in the member
organization. In the EU, to implement a rule is understood to mean to make it 3
law in the member state. If implementation also meant changes in practice, i

would be more difficult to report compliance and members’ life would be more
difficult.

So it is relatively easy to recruit members when members are not affected much
by the organization and its standards. This is meagre consolation for those who seek
to influence others by forming a standard-based organization. When more exten-
sive or more costly adaptations are necessary to become a member, and the advan-
tages do not outweigh the costs, the organization will encounter severe problems
in recruiting and keeping members. The organization may then have very little
impact; its very existence may even be threatened.

So far we have discussed why standard-based organizations are set up and what
makes individuals or organizations likely to join. In the next two sections we dis-
cuss how the creation of standard-based organizations affects the dissemination of

standards as well as how it affects how these rules are applied, and how they are
maintained or modified.

Dissemination of standards through formal organization

Traditional standardization leads to standards that can be followed by many.
Anyone may attempt to comply with the standard. There may be some type of
monitoring system to check that those who purport to comply with the standard
actually do so, but apart from that, the standard is Open to anyone. Standardization
through formal organization can lead to a standard with a different compass than if
other methods are used. Standardizing through organization offers a means for stan-

dardizers to control how many adopt a certain standard, to stimulate adoption of it,
or to limit the number of adopters.

Stimulating the adoption of a standard

Standard-based organizations may propagate standards. They may also actively
attempt to recruit new members and thereby increase the number of those com-

plying with the rules. Many may want to become members for no other reason
than that they want to be part of the Organization, whatever its rules, but once

members, they have to comply with the rules. The formation of the Swedish Floor


STANDARDIZING THROUGH ORGANIZATION 6]

Ball Federation stimulated the use of its rules. The rules gained legitimacy through

their designation by a body which itself has achieved legitimacy through affiliation
with the Swedish Sports Confederation. And the formation of additional clubs,

which use SIBF rules, is also stimulated, which finally has made World
Championship games possible.

The rules laid down by the standard-based organization can also be spread out-
side the organization. The organization clarifies 4 rule, which, sometimes, receives

credibility even outside the organization and becomes an accepted standard there.
The ethical rules of one trade association for instance can be copied by another
trade association. An organization such as the International Football Federation in
practice defines what football is around the globe. It is definitely questionable
whether those who do not abide by its rules can actually be said to be playing foot-
ball. So, the fact that a standard-based organization is exclusive in its membership

does not necessarily mean that its rules are not widely spread or that they do not
have far-reaching effects.

Limiting the adoption of standards

Alternatively, the formation of a standard-

based organization can be used for
limiting the adoption of standards.

An organization can be considerably more
exclusive than an open standard. The organization can control who becomes a

member and can strictly limit the number of members it accepts. The creation of
an organization, based on certain rules, therefore often makes it possible to limit
the number of individuals or organizations who follow these rules. Even if anyone
who desires to do so can choose to follow the organization's rules, the value of
doing so is limited if one is not at the same time accepted as a member of the orga-
nization. For example, even if you follow all the same rules as an authorized lawyer,
unless you are a member of the national Bar Association you will still not be

accepted as a ‘real’ lawyer. Even if a club complies with the standards set by SIBF
for floor ball, it will find it difficult, if not impossible, to get a game if it is not affil-

iated with the Federation. And if one is not allowed to be a member of a trade
association and to work for common interests with others, the incentive to com-
ply with the organization’s standards is reduced.

If standardization through organization is to limit the number of adopters of a
standard, it is necessary for entrants to the standard-based organization to meet
additional prerequisites; if everyone who follows the organization’s rules is eligible
for membership then the effects of the limitation are minimized. These additional
prerequisites may include compliance with further rules: the organization’s mem-
bers comply with a combination of many rules instead of few constitutive ones. If
a club aspires to membership in SIBF then it must comply with the rules applica-
ble to all sports clubs in the Swedish Sports Confederation, as well as those per-
taining specifically to floor ball.

Organizations may also limit entry by rules requiring members to be different—
for example, many international organizations accept only one member


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

62

all the members must be of differe

nt ”
at is, MAtOnalitjeg

organization per country, th

ar ith ASTE.
This is the case with kand not need to set general critex
Also, å standard-based organization does g Mteria (ag; de

Fom its constitutive rules) for prospective members. rn ee application
an be treated on its own terms. Organizations are g y regarded ag }
can be who is allowed to join. For instance, no one can SUCCessf

TE if the existing members do not accept that claim: jr 4

not enough to claim to follow ASTE's rules. Finally, other conditions for mem.
bership can of course have a sufficiently limiting effect: organizations may have

high fees or may make heavy demands on participation 4 same etc.

There may be several motives behind efforts to limit t pg er of actors Com-
plying with standards. If the purpose of the standard is to faci ne interaction per-
haps one does not want to facilitate interaction with everyone. It may be important
to regulate competition with a few large, important compeutors while it would be
troublesome to regulate interaction with a large number of minor competitors, [f
the purpose is to co-operate, to serve mutual interests, one would not necessarily
wish to co-operate with all who share these interests. The more numerous the
members are the more difficult it is to co-operate, and the more widely shared myst
be any resources the standard-based organization creates.

If the purpose of the standard is to give actors a certain status or prestige this pro-
vides an additional reason for limiting the number of members of the organization,
If membership has a certain status the members can increase their own prestige by
letting only a few others be members. The standard becomes more like a patent—
a rule which only some specified few are allowed to follow—than a standard open
to anyone. Only members can gain status from following the rule. A rule which js
tied to an exclusive organization in this way resembles a trade mark rather than an
open standard. An ASTE degree has become a trade mark of ASTE and ASTE
schools, and it is hard to duplicate. Even if other schools could set the same rules
for their degree, they cannot call it an ‘ASTE’ degree. Even if the trade mark
‘ASTE’ does not have legal protection, such a claim would have dubious credibil-
ity at best.

When standard-based organizations succeed in delimiting the use of their rules

to their members and restrict the number of members, they contribute to an
increased differentiation of the organizational field.

sovereign rights over
claim membership in AS

Application and modification of standards

Standardization of practice

Traditional standardizers have little control over the adoption and implementation
of their standards. Formulating and spreading a standard is one thing; applying it in

practice 1s another. In theory, a formal organization represents a higher degree of
organization than traditional standardization. So the creation of a standard-based

organization should increase standardizers’ Opportunities for control. But, as a long


STANDARDIZING THROUGH ORGANIZATION 63

tradition 1n organization studies tells us, there is a considerable difference between

| the theoretical and the actual degree of organization that a formal organization can

achieve. So how much organization is actually achieved by creating a formal orga-
nization varies. As we have already seen, standardizers cannot be certain that their
new organization will attract members. Also, generating resources for the organi-

zation may be difficult. To gain and keep control can be equally difficult. The
members may prove to be quite unwilling to accept rules, at least in all areas, and

they may be even more unwilling to follow them in their own practice. Besides,
the members are likely to demand some influence on what directives and standards
are issued; in situations of conflict such demands tend to hinder the production of

rules. In the worst case standardizers may achieve less by creating a formal organi-
zation than by standardizing in traditional ways.

Incentives to actually apply the rules can be expected to vary, depending on
whether the main aim is to use those rules as part of one’s status or to facilitate inter-
action between members. In the latter case the incentive is strong; the application
of the rules may be required for interaction to take place. In many sports there is a
full-fledged system for monitoring compliance with the rules, namely the system
of using referees. The training of referees was one of the first measures instituted
by the newly formed SIBF, and the lack of trained referees delayed the start of tour-
nament play in Sweden.

If rules are primarily developed as a status enhancer, it is not always as important
for the standard-based organization and its members to ensure that the rules are

applied. Monitoring need not be so strict. There is no continuous monitoring to
ensure that SPUR’s ethical principles are followed. It was proposed that schools
should be checked for compliance with ASTE’s rules on the students’ linguistic
performance. A few language teachers proposed that joint tests be used for language
testing. This became a controversial issue, which was discussed thoroughly for a
long time in ASTE. In the end the opponents to such a system of joint tests won
and the proposal was rejected.

One indication that a standard-based organization is serious about compliance
with its rules is the imposition of sanctions for non-compliance. If such sanctions
exist, errors and deviations can be managed relatively easily. When one has paid the
fine or penalty imposed, one is back in business. After the requisite time in the
penalty box one is allowed back on the floor ball court. An organization which
does not have such sanctions is more likely to sufter a credibility crisis, or to be
forced to expel the erring members, when non-compliance is detected. Both cir-
cumstances may even threaten an organization’s survival. Such an organization
could therefore have greater inducements to avoid monitoring or to hide non-

compliance.
It is not necessarily easy to determine whether rules are complied with or not.

Rules can be expressed in such broad or vague terms that it becomes unclear exactly
who is complying with the standard and who is not. ASTE made its descriptions of
required courses very general and non-specific. The course descriptions, therefore,
allowed for great differences in content, which made it easy for the organization


A WORLD OF STANDARDS
64

rs to claim compliance. SPUR’s ethical principles are

: Similar
interaction, however, are often q;

and its membe
ferent

Standards which are meant CO facilitate

SIBF rules for floor ball are detailed and clear. | ae
Paradoxically standard-based organizations sometimes function as obstac

the application of the rules they espouse, in that they are able to protect their
bers ha external monitoring. Qutsiders see membership of the standard

organization as a guarantee of compliance with the rules, eo Organ

may only have relatively weak instruments for aT ome vintage Member
are protected from excessive demands for compliance, whether from internal or
external sources: the standard-based organization becomes a buffer between hå
members and the outside world. For example, there are open standards for Univer.
sities. It is only possible for a university to claim adherence to these standards jf it
has undergone external inspection and certification. Such inspection and certifica.
tion is not required for membership in ASTE. The very existence of the ethical
council and ethical rules in SPUR may actually serve as a buffer against the Outside
world, allowing members to be less ethical than if SPUR and its ethical rules dig
not exist. Regulation of oneself may prevent regulation by others even if the self.

regulation is more in the mind than a reality.

For the same reason outsiders are sometimes forced to comply with an organi-
zation’s standards more closely than a member. A non-member has to demonstrate
much more clearly than members that it is following a standard; members are
expected to follow them and are therefore not checked on very carefully. In the
case of the EU, for example, such mechanisms may make states which have cho-
sen to remain outside it, like Norway and Switzerland, follow some EU rules more
closely than most EU members.

The weaker are the demands for the application ofa rule, the more rules an orga-
nization can have. Since compliance is not monitored, the outward acceptance of
many rules is possible. If strict compliance is demanded, if conformity is the goal,
then the rules cannot be too many or too difficult to comply with.

les to
Mem.
~baseq
IZation

Maintenance and modification of rules

In the cases we have studied, the standard-based organizations and their rules were
created by a small number of people, representing a small number of organizations.
The organizations represented were the first members. After the constitutive rules
were determined, new members were recruited, members who for the most part
had to accept the rules created by the founders.

When élite floor ball was created, it was essentially done by a single club. Their
rules became standard through their inviting other clubs to come and play on their
terms. An inner circle of six clubs participated in setting the rules for the matches
and larger tournaments in the first few years. When the Swedish Floor Ball
Federation was created the standardization process was in essence complete.
ASTE's constitutive rules were decided through informal consultation between
two university rectors from two countries, who knew each other well. It was not


EE ETE” ee ! ee ee” ae

STANDARDIZING THROUGH ORGANIZATION 65

until after the rules had been set that other universities were recruited. A few busi-
nessmen in the temporary employment business, who were already co-operating
in another association created SPUR. SPUR offered a forum for businessmen, in a
new and expanding business sector, where future strategies and challenges could be
discussed. SPUR membership later began to be recognized as a quality trade mark,
and the recruitment process largely assumed its own momentum.

In time, and as new members are added, there may be demands for revision of
the rules which were the impetus for the formation of the organization. But there
may also be strong opposing forces, forces that work to retain the original rules. A
desire to retain the rules derives from the larger number of members and the fact
that it is difficult to agree on new standards. Also, many, maybe most, members

joined because they agreed with the original rules. The most severe critics may

have chosen to remain outside the organization. In some cases it is possible for
those who prefer alternative rules to transfer to another standard-based organiza-
tion or to create a new organization. This makes them less inclined to fight for revi-
sion of the rules within the original organization. For instance, when the floor

ball—'indoor bandy’—players were rejected for membership of the old Bandy
Federation they created a new standard-based organization and the new subfield of

floor ball.

Also, the external environment may wish the existing rules to be retained. The
standard-based organization and its members have a certain position in the field—
a position that is based on its rules. New rules might mean a new position and a
new position for other actors too, which these other actors may not readily accept.
For instance, it is not certain that new rules will give the members the same status
in the eyes of the rest of the world as the old ones, at least not without time-con-
suming rhetoric and expensive marketing on the part of the standard-based orga-
nization.

For these reasons, changing rules is particularly difficult when the rules give
legitimacy to the members themselves or their activities. Once temporary employ-
ment agencies that follow SPUR’s guidelines are accepted as the only serious and
legitimate agencies, it becomes difficult to change these guidelines. If the
International Football Federation rules are the very definition of football, then they
become difficult to change. To introduce radically new rules would be seen as
introducing a completely new game, requiring a new standard-based organization.
The Bandy Federation’s negative position on floor ball can be explained by the fact
that the floor ball clubs were in fact not engaged in bandy according to the feder-
ation’s rules.

Of course this does not mean that basic rules never change. For instance, ASTE
modified its rules somewhat to accommodate the practice of some of its new mem-
bers. We assume though that it is more common for standard-based organizations
to expand and add rules than to change them.


66

Standard-based organizations in å globalized world

In our three case studies we noted that there s an sermon or global dimen.
sion to efforts at standardization through organizing. Many re ard-based Organi.
zations have, like ASTE, members from several 1900 ns. And Nationa]
standard-based organizations are often members of pen eg standard-bage 1
organizations. For example, SPUR 1s a member O I (Confédération
International du Travail Temporaire). The Swedish Floor Ball Federation, SIBF
contributed actively to the creation of an international floor ball federation, which

aims to introduce the game into yet other countries.

The lack of an equivalent of the nation-state at the global level makes this level
comparatively less organized than the national scene. The space for standard-baseq
organizations is therefore great at the global level, where they do not have to Com-
pete with state rules and state agencies. The great number of international standard-
based organizations can be seen as a partial substitute for a non-existent world state

International standard-based organizations have a complex relationship with
nation-states. Most of them are private organizations, not public. To some extent,
they and their members may be said to replace state governance within nations as
well as providing global order. At the same time, however, it is surprisingly com-
mon for standard-based organizations to be organized with the nation-state as the
guiding principle, even when the members are not nation-states. The organizations
are international, not transnational. Even in an organization like ASTE, where it 1S
very hard to see why the nationality of the member schools should be important.
the nation-state was the organizing principle: only one school per state could be 3
member. The nation-state contributes to the organizational structure, even if it
does not influence the content of the organization’s activities.

On the global scene

In earlier sections of this chapter, we identified several reasons why standard-based
organizations are set up and why they are able to attract members. The same rea-

sons apply in relation to international organizations. The establishment of inter-
national standard-based organizations can facilitate interaction and co-ordination

among members all over the world. And common interests are advanced more
strongly at both the global level and within individual nations. For instance, many
international standard-based organizations act as powerful lobbyists both interna-
tionally and within nations.

International standard-based organizations provide members with an identity
that can be understood abroad and they may increase members’ legitimacy abroad
as well as at home. Individual members find it easier to explain who they are and
what they do, and to achieve acceptance, when they can refer to membership of a
standard-based organization which in turn is part of a recognized international par-
ent organization. For example, SPUR’s membership of CITT makes it easier for
Swedish temporary employment agencies to explain to people in other countries


STANDARDIZING THROUGH ORGANIZATION 6/

what type of company they represent and its primary type of activity. The mem-

bership tells others what kind of actor they are dealing with and what actions they
can expect.

The need for this type of identity and status is often greater in a transnational
environment than in one’s own country,

or local environment, where it is easy to
recognize ‘the usual actors’. The

need to create similarity is greater, the more dif-
ferent and varied the environment is. The creation of standard-based organizations

is a means of establishing a new type of affinity, or family name, to counteract
anonymity when acting outside one’s home arena. The same categories of floor ball

players, Masters students, and temporary employment agencies are found across the

world. Standard-based organizations for these categories of people create order and
reduce complexity at the global level.

International standard-based organizations may also reinforce the status of their

members. For instance, some organizations select world champions. Restrictions on

membership of a standard-based organization renders this an even more exclusive
status if the members are to be found throughout the world.

A globalizing process

The forming of international standard-based organizations is not merely a response
to increasing globalization, but a globalizing process in itself. International stan-
dard-based organizations influence global organizational fields as well as national
fields.

Sometimes international standard-based organizations are created by national
standard-based organizations. But the reverse process is perhaps more common.
The existence of an international standard-based organization facilitates the cre-
ation of national organizations. Those wanting to set up a national standard-based
organization see themselves as part of an established, international order, and they
may affiliate themselves at an early stage to the international organization. Their
organizing efforts are thus given a higher degree of legitimacy than if there were
no such organization to refer to in the first place. Once the national organization
is established, membership in an international organization may also confer on the
national organization greater authority at home. It becomes easier to refer to estab-
lished international practice and a common set of rules. The international achieves
significance for the national.

International standard-based organizations contribute to global order. They
define a certain category of organization, such as temporary employment agencies,
that share common characteristics across the world. They initiate the founding of
national organizations, and they have a say in deciding what actors and what kind
of activity are considered legitimate. Just as standard-based organizations create
actors and activities in the national organizational arena, they likewise play a role
in the constitution of organizations at a global level.

International standard-based organizations also influence the activities of their
members and their members’ members by setting directives and standards. They

A WORLD OF STANDARDS

68

contribute to the spread of these rules phar a vade or | hat a
anos : d similar national organizations are often established in Other coy

bers of SI UR å pennres of origin. They support their national Organiza :
tries besides rep anization CITT, since these organizations help stang
well as the globa pot comply with to achieve wider distribution and ;
the member comp For example, CITT regularly arranges international
global seer are described and discussed among representatives
en : sie Many of the standards concerning the organization of
de in Sweden stem from Er vr discussions between Senior
managers of temporary agencies of different nationa origins at CITT meetings,

The influence of American know-how and perspectives on how best to Organize
me extent be traced through links between Members of

" Mem,

ton a
ards that
NCreased
COnfer.
from q
a flex.

temporary staff can to so be
the respective standard-based organizations. |
The globalization of standards should be understood as a delicate balance

between similarity and difference. In large, international standard-based Organiza-
tions it can be especially difficult to ensure that rules are followed. Member Orga-
nizations in different countries are often given leeway to run their operations much
as they please, without interference from or monitoring by the international stan.
dard-based organization. Such flexibility may be a precondition for the Operation
to be able to function within a local, national institutional framework. The Joint
rules then function as a point of reference, or as generally formulated standards,
rather than as detailed directives. ASTE members should follow some common
rules, but there is still much space within which to adjust education to comply with
established national practice. While CITT has set common standards for how 1
temporary staffing agency should operate in both Europe and the USA, state and
federal laws differ. Hence, their structure and ways of operating vary considerably,

These examples illustrate the important point that while the rules about how a
certain activity should be organized and conducted may easily achieve global spread
through international standard-based organizations, the practices that develop
within each nation still tend to vary to a considerable degree. In this way many
organizations all over the world share some basic principles, even though they
behave quite differently. International standard-based organizations provide an
important, but restricted, degree of order and control over global organizational

fields.


PART II

Producing and Distributing

Standards


D

The Knowledge Base of Standards

STAFFAN FURUSTEN

In this second part of the book we examine the supply side of standardization, and
the production and distribution of standards, on the basis of a number of empirical
studies. We discuss questions about who become standardizers and why, how stan-
dardizers organize themselves, what determines the content of their standards, and
what strategies they use to convince people to follow their standards. We focus on
administrative standards—standards for how to design and manage organizations.
The present chapter discusses how the content of standards is formed and on
what kind of knowledge standards are based. Chapter 6 describes how an inter-
national standards organization is organized and how one can create agreement
about standards and legitimacy for the organization and its standards. Standards are
sometimes created by organizations other than those which have standardization as
their official purpose. Chapter 7 describes how an international organization set up
as a forum for the discussion of public administration issues ended up being an
active standardizer. Finally, Chapter 8 uses three case studies of standardizers within

the quality area as the basis for a discussion of how standardizers try to persuade oth-
ers to follow their standards.

In this chapter we use [SO’s 9000 series of ‘quality’ standards as our empirical
example for discussing the knowledge base of standards. The ISO 9000 standards
are widely known, and they have influenced many other standards relating to qual-
ity and to the management of organizations. We begin by describing the standard
in more detail and summarizing the assumptions about organizations from which
the standard was developed. We then compare the standard, first with scholarly
thinking on how organizations function, then with the popular management cul-

ture.

What is ISO 9000 and what does it provide?

ISO 9000 was developed by the International Standardization Organization (ISO),
in recent years ISO 9000 becoming one of ISO's principal fields of activity (Tamm

Hallström 1996a). ISO 9000 consists of ‘internationally agreed principles and
requirements for managing an enterprise so as to earn the confidence of customers

and markets’ (SIS 1994, p. 2).

ene ie Se din -


72 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

what loosely referring to [SO 9000, we are not really talking aboy

In somewhat y 9000 designates me usually known ..”
single standard. The concept of ISO nie PS | N as
family of standards’. Thus, ISO 9000 1s a generic — 3 Selene Standards
These make up different elements of a system for ASUS 4 ity in Production,

different kinds of businesses, such as serv:

processes and are supposed to apply to differen Å vg rViceg
and manufacturing. It follows that organizations — Å cert1 16 for genera
compliance with ISO 9000, but only for complying wit ; ng enn Of an
one of the partial standards, contained in ISO 9001 to IS |

There is no single text that includes all of ISO 9000. We must look to several
texts. In most texts the standards are divided into two categories: ten Partial stan-
dards, which are recommendations, and four which are ‘mandatory’ (if one Wants
to be certified as a ISO 9000 user) (SIS 1994, p. 9). The recommendations are on
the whole more general, whereas the ‘mandatory’ standards are more specific, A
recommended standard will usually refer to provisions of a ‘mandatory’ standard

It is not easy to read the text of a standard and understand exactly what it says,
Possibly for this reason, many national standards organizations sell not only the
standard itself but also a number of different publications which are supposed to tel]
us what ISO 9000 really means. Our analysis of ISO 9000 is based both on the text
of the standards and on the written information provided by SIS.

y

Quality

ISO 9000 is often referred to as a standard of quality, the critical word being 'qual-
ity’. The words ‘improving quality’ are key words. Improving quality is defined
more precisely as enhancing the value of a product or service for the customer
Improving the quality of an organizational process means enhancing the value for
the customer in a commercial exchange with an organization that sells its products
or services. All processes in the selling organization are to be aimed exclusively at
providing such quality for the customer.

This reasoning is used as an argument for quality assurance of the Operations of
organizations selling products or services. For example, it is considered important
that ‘the business be managed efficiently, with a customer focus, and by competent
staff’ (SIS 1994, p. 2). If an organization is successful in this regard, it will suppos-
edly thrive and be profitable in the long run. The standard EN ISO 9004-1: 1994,
entitled ‘Quality management and the elements of quality systems—Part 1, General

Guidelines’, provides that every organization should give the quality of its products

the highest priority. Quality leads to success, and the products of a successful orga-
nization should serve ‘a well defined need, area of use, Or purpose’ (

Further, products should ‘satisfy customer expectations’ and confo

op. cit., p. 3).

rm not only to

‘applicable standards and specifications’, but also to ‘the demands of society’. They
should also meet ‘environmental demands’, be ‘obtainable at
and be ‘delivered economically’,

. . ,
competitive prices ,


-— — —===—> © — —T—E

THE KNOWLEDGE BASE OF STANDARDS 73

Product quality and quality systems

In providing for quality in the processes of a given organization, we must distin-
guish between product quality and what is called the quality system. In seeking to

specify what is meant by product quality, the standard defines four different aspects
of the term:

Quality due to definitions of needs for the product: quality due to defining and updating the
product to meet marketplace requirements and opportunities.

Quality due to product design: quality due to designing into the product the characteristics

that enable it to meet marketplace requirements and Opportunities, and to provide value to
customers and other stakeholders.

Quality due to conformance to product design: quality due to maintaining day-to-day con-

sistency in conforming to product design and in providing the designed characteristics and
values for customers and other stakeholders.

Quality due to product support: quality due to furnishing support throughout the product

life cycle, as needed, to provide the designed characteristics and values for customers and
other stakeholders (EN ISO 9004-1: 1994, pp. 5-6).

In other words, product quality, according to ISO, can be described as guaran-
teed reliability in terms of the properties of the product. The customer is guaran-

teed that the product will be continually updated so that market demands are met

at all times. The customer must be assured that the product is what it purports to
be and that it meets customer needs.

The second form of quality, the quality system, does not relate directly to the prod-
uct itself but to the system of processes by which the product is manufactured and dis-

tributed to customers. Product quality is only one component of the quality system.
The standard which describes the quality system states that the system is based on

the understanding that all work is accomplished by a process . . . Every process has inputs.
The outputs are the results of the process. The outputs are products, tangible or intangible.
The process itself is (or should be) a transformation that adds value. Every process involves
people and/or other resources in some way . . . There are opportunities to make measure-
ments on the inputs, at various places in the process as well as on the outputs (op. cit., p. 6).

The concept of quality systems thus refers to processes which are already in oper-
ation before product quality is achieved. The system includes all processes relating
to the manufacture of the product, its delivery, and its use in the customer’s orga-
nization. The standard covers ‘organizational structure, responsibility, procedures,
processes, and resources for managing and controlling the business in regard to
quality’ (SIS 1994, p. 24). Determining whether the organization's processes are of
the requisite quality requires that they be clearly defined, as must the inputs needed
to perform them. When this step has been completed, measurements can be made
at all stages: input, process, and output.

While the concepts of quality and quality systems may be key words in the
standard, it is not easy to determine what they mean. Quality is defined as
‘all properties, taken together, of a good or service which render it capable of


74 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

).

licit or implicit needs of customers and the market’ (op. cit,. p. 24

satisfying exp h to express as a principle, but putting it into Dra

This statement is simple enoug des. Rå
ke | rinciple assumes that customer.
tice is a different matter. For instance, the p p $ alway.

know their own needs and can also communicate them to the seller. But how can

: ‘+ “mplicit needs’? Neither
customers know and communicate their implicit the standard

itself nor various information brochures mention the possible problems and limita-

tions of the standard. Instead, these materials tell organizations what to do to imple-

ment the requirements of the standard.

Quality assurance

Another key concept in ISO 9000 is quality assurance: that is, principles for assur-
ing the quality of the quality system, or, in other words, for guaranteeing utility and
value to customers. These principles of quality in an organization must be univer-
sal; they must tell every organization aspiring to quality what to do. Thus, they
must be general enough for use at a steel mill in the United States and at a public
dental clinic in a small Swedish town. The following excerpt expresses the scope

of the standard:

The principles of ISO 9000 are universal. If it is appropriate to use the concept of ‘customer’
when speaking of the operation, then it is covered by ISO 9000. It makes no real difference
whether a business is exposed to competition or not. Optimal use of resources and satisfac-
tion of customer needs are desirable in all businesses (SIS 1994, p. 3).

Even though the standard is universal in regard to principles of organization, it
does not claim to indicate how these principles are to be implemented (EN ISO
9001: 1994, p. 3). It is always clear that procedures for implementation are regarded
as dependent on local conditions which vary from case to case. For example, it is
stressed that ‘principles and requirements are what is standardized’. Implementa-
tion, on the other hand, ‘is unique to each situation; to have an enduring effect, it
must be clearly and directly related to earnings and to the requirement of prof-
itability’ (SIS 1994, p. 3). This idea is reflected in the following excerpts:

Must all companies have the same quality system? By no means . . . Standards are tools which
provide opportunities and flexibility, not obstacles (op. cit., p. 12).

The ISO 9000 series gives no answers to the question ‘How?’, but it does answer the ques-
tion What?" .. . There is basically no difference between business development at a manu-

facturing company and at a services company. All activities which affect quality must be
organized and managed so as to achieve established objectives (op. cit., p. 17).

Thus, ISO 9000 is not intended as a detailed prescription for how quality is to be
achieved, but as a tool adaptable to the particular local conditions of each user.
Thus, ISO 9000 somewhat paradoxically tells every organization to follow the rule
while at the same time leaving it free to do so in its own way! Despite this para-

dox, it is assumed that ISO 9000 will have considerable impact, as is indicated 1n
the following excerpt from the SIS information brochure:


THE KNOWLEDGE BASE OF STANDARDS 715

Development in the field of quality today focuses on improvement, on constant prepared-

ness and anticipation, on continually reassessing, analysing, following up, and deciding on
changes and improvements. Improvements provide stability; they make the business sound

in the long run and more competitive. The quality system based on ISO 9000 is intended as

a framework for value-creating improvements of this nature, which benefit customers, sup-
pliers, society at large, owners and employees (op. cit., p. 4)

Assumptions about organization: An interpretation of ISO 9000

We have just taken a first look at ISO 9000, as conceived by the standardizer. As

we see it, the standard is based on certain assumptions about what makes a good
organization. These are embodied in six principles for achieving quality: customer
orientation, clearly defined processes, a view of organizations as manageable units,
the use of measurable objectives, management that exercises control, and ongoing
documentation of each process. We shall now discuss these assumptions, while also
familiarizing ourselves more thoroughly with the provisions of the standard.

A fundamental first principle is that all organizational processes, both social and

technical, should be designed to satisfy customer needs (SIS 1994, pp. 3-4, EN ISO

9000-1: 1994). While the term customer orientation is not mentioned, this concept is
central to the standard.

Organizations should be seen as a network of processes, and these processes shall

focus on satisfying customer needs (SIS 1994, p. 24). The same idea is described
and illustrated in the standard itself in this way:

An organization needs to identify, organize and manage its network of processes and inter-
faces. The organization creates, improves and provides consistent quality in its offerings
through the network of processes . . . To clarify interfaces, responsibility, and authority, a
process should have an owner as the person responsible. The quality of executive manage-

ment’s own processes, such as strategic planning, is especially important (EN ISO 9000-1:
1994, p. 7).

A second principle is that what the organization does should be differentiated
into various clearly defined processes. At the same, these should be integrated, inter-
acting to fulfil specified customer needs. However, process ownership is an impor-
tant aspect here. If each process has an owner, interfaces can be defined between
organizations, as well as between organizational processes within an organization.
The idea of process ownership is that the owner also controls what happens in the
process and is responsible for it.

A third principle is that organizations are assumed to be manageable. They are seen
as separate from their environment, other than in relation to their customers, of
course. Organizations and organizational processes are assumed to operate as closed
systems, except in defined interfaces between different processes. Moreover, the
only needs to be met in these interfaces are those of customers. Other factors in the
environment of an organization are assumed to be irrelevant.

While the needs to be satisfied are those of customers, ISO 9000 is also regarded
as a tool which organizations can use to achieve their own purposes and goals.


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

76

heading ‘Organizational goals’, the standard EN ISO 90001: 199
e he

ccess.

Under th ; 7

ag what is required for su
an organization should ensure that the technica]
products will be under oon

Cuss

ves a

cting the quality of its ae | © ier
: services. such control sh Nether
d materials or ould

4 and, most importantly, prevention of quality ne

In order to meet Its object
tive and human factors afte

hardware, software, processe

towards the reduction, eliminatio
(EN ISO 9900-1: 1994, p. 3).

to be an instrument for co-ordinating technical, ,

trative, and human factors to enhance utility to the customer. The organization I
considered a tool which can be reshaped to conform to the standard. Peni
s interchangeable components of the system. Management Keates

and administration so that goals are achieved. The 9
ut of customer needs ag ‘De

formities

ISO 9000 is thus said eg

regarded a

people, technology,

| r9aniza.
Hon is seen as machinery which receives an Np

by management.

A fourth principle, expressed in the standard EN ISO 9000-1: 1994 (pp. 5-6)

and elsewhere, relates to goals. Organizations are p resumed to be capable Of Setting
measurable objectives and monitoring progress towards goal achievement. This prin-
ciple requires that customer needs can be defined and that measurable goals can be
set accordingly. It is assumed that it is possible (1) to define customer needs Clearly:
(2) to offer an output (product, etc.) which meets them; (3) to organize Processes
aimed solely at producing that output; (4) to direct, manage, and control Processes
so that they are continually improved from the customer’s viewpoint: and (5)
through continual auditing, both internal and external, to ensure that all of the pre-
ceding is in fact accomplished.

These principles are combined in an argument for clarity and order in the Orga-
nization. The organization is subdivided into a number of distinct processes, each
with clear boundaries. Integration of the various processes is assumed to take place
at these boundaries. Co-ordination is provided through the management’s quality
system. It should be possible to see clearly what is being done in each unit and in
each process within the unit, how this activity is linked to the overall Strategy of
the organization, and how value to the customer is ultimately increased. At each
step 1t should be possible to measure whether established goals are being met.

ISO 9000 is based on the belief that all operations will be made more efficient by
thinking first, then by establishing a structure and determining what is to be done
and how, and finally by carrying it out. The purpose and goal of each activity are to
be documented so that later it will be possible to measure whether the goal has been
achieved. The role of measurement is emphasized in the standard for ‘Quality man-
agement and the elements of quality systems—Part 1: General Guidelines’:

effectiveness in financial terms, management will receive the results in a common business
language from all departments (EN ISO 9000-1: 1994, p. 9)


THE KNOWLEDGE BASE OF STANDARDS yi]

As soon as any variances are observed, they are to be explained and corrected in
relation to the goals which have been set for each process. It is the duty of man-
agement to perform the necessary measurements and to keep operations moving
ahead in a common direction. The organization is quite clearly regarded as sepa-
rate from its environment, rationally functioning, and manageable and controllable.

Quality assurance 1s assumed to guarantee that an organization which has been cer-
tified as conforming to ISO 9000 will meet these criteria.

The fifth principle is that management, after defining the boundaries of the
organization, both can and must manage it, and control it. Management is also given
the vital responsibility of designing the quality system, of monitoring it to see that
it functions efficiently, and of continually upgrading it so that quality will be

enhanced. The standard ‘Quality systems—Part 2: General Guidelines’, designated
SS-ISO 9004-2 (p. 6), provides, for example, as follows:

Management 1s responsible for establishing a policy for service quality and customer satis-

faction. Successful implementation of this policy is dependent upon management commit-
ment to the development and effective operation of a quality system.

Management exercises control so that the business will achieve its established
goals. It is up to management to define what the text of the standard terms the
‘interfaces’ between different processes. Management is also responsible for design-
ing the structure of the quality system and for furnishing the necessary manpower
and resources. Further, management is to establish the policy of the business on
quality (in other words, what is referred to as its reputation for quality, goals for
quality, and methods for achieving these goals) and to see that this policy is ‘known,
understood, implemented, and upheld’ (op. cit.). In addition, management must
set goals for quality, allocate responsibility and authority in regard to quality, and
motivate, train, and develop employees accordingly (op. cit., pp. 7-11). Thus, the
management of quality is critical to the effectiveness of the quality system.

EN ISO 9000-1: 1994 (p. 6) defines the concept of quality management as follows:

Quality management is accomplished by managing the processes in the organization. It is
necessary to manage a process in two senses:

—the structure and operation of the process itself within which the product or information
flows; and
—the quality of the product or information flowing within the structure.

According to this definition, managing a process involves establishing an organ-
izational structure and controlling the quality system (various organizational
processes), as well as product quality. Management and control are treated as syn-
onymous. If quality management is effective, the organization will be managed so
that utility to the customer is maximized. This thinking is expressed in the follow-
ing statement:

A well structured quality system is a valuable management resource in the optimization and
control of quality in relation to benefit, cost, and risk considerations (EN ISO 9004-1: 1994,

p. 4).


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

78

| snt's sett
In brief, quality management 1s about management s ng goals for the bing.

ss. Once goals have been set, responsibility and a are to be allocat
that it is clear who does what, without duplication of work. In other words,

-eflects the aims, goals, and methods of its mang

| 8°Ment
al to the business and to an effective qua

The quality system of a company
lity SYS~

_. . These aspects of management are crucl
tem (SIS 1994, pp. 17-18).

control the overall aspects of the business, and jt seems

It is up to management to on agi aio:
t is in a position to exercise this contro)

virtually taken for granted that managemen gg
sp able to kee :
In other words, it is assumed that management wilt DE P the business gn

a particular course and to see that the system is receptive to influence by Customers
Guaranteeing processes is the object of the sixth principle for achieving quality
Processes are to be guaranteed by documentation of the methods of quality manage.

ment and by the design of the entire quality system. All processes of the organizy-
tion are to be documented. While each organization is to develop its own specially
designed model, the steps and procedures required by the standard must always be

included. EG |
In addition to the requirement that goals, responsibility, and authority are to be

clearly documented, more detailed operating plans are required for achieving doc-
umented goals. These plans must also be documented systematically, as must the
strategies for carrying out the plans. The plans and strategies are to be implemented
so that the goals are achieved, and implementation, too, must be documented.
After implementation, the results can be reviewed and evaluated in a procedure
known as a quality audit, in which documented results are compared with docu-
mented goals, plans, and strategies. There is a special series of standards related to
the 9000 family, ISO 10000, for use by quality auditors. If the audit shows that
these special standards have generally been met, it will be assumed that efficiency,
and thus quality, are high. Otherwise it will be necessary to improve procedures,
change goals, revise plans, and/or improve implementation:

Efficient, understandable documentation of the business, its processes and its procedures is a
useful aid to all employees . . . Documentation should not be more extensive than required

by the business. All documents should be up to date, relevant, approved, and available to
those concerned (SIS 1994, p. 20).

It is believed that documentation of every subprocess in an organization will per-
mit timely detection and correction of ‘errors’ in processes. If this requirement IS
met, the standard is considered to have a built-in ‘improvement ideology’ which
ensures that ‘errors’ will be corrected more or less automatically. The purpose of
documenting procedures is to guarantee that products are designed as intended.

Limited academic influence

The provisions of ISO 9000 have been summarized above. But why is the standard
designed as it is? What kind of knowledge has been codified in the standard? As we


THE KNOWLEDGE BASE OF STANDARDS 79

proceed in this chapter, we shall ask where the ideas originated, on which the stan-

dard is based. We start by looking at the provisions of ISO 9000 in the light of what

academics say about organizations. We then compare ISO 9000 with the main-
stream of what we call popular management culture.

Research has shown that organizations do not function as rational instruments

for managements seeking to achieve their goals. In other words, it is questionable
whether success is a function of predetermined strategies, optimal decisions, and
actions implementing these strategies and decisions Studies emphasize that business
executives spend only a small portion of their time on planning for the future and
are often compelled to react to what has already occurred (see, for example,
Carlson 1951/1991: Mintzberg 1973). Moreover, it has also been pointed out that
management does not have access to perfect information and does not consider all
alternatives before finally determining and implementing the best course of action
(e.g. March and Simon 1958: Cohen, March, and Olsen 1972; Brunsson 1985).
Consequently, academic research has shown that the notion that success and fail-
ure depend totally on what management does
that organizations function as rational social machines that can be designed in the
same way regardless of the special circumstances of particular situations. It is even
uncertain whether it is always possible to establish goals and to develop plans and
strategies to be followed (e.g. Mintzberg 1978: Rombach 1991). It is also debatable
whether efficiency and success can be measured in terms of congruence between
outcomes and goals (Rombach and Sahlin-Andersson 1996). Lindblom (1958), for

example, maintained that organizational development should be viewed primarily
as an effect of incremental rather than instrumental efforts; in other words, devel-

opment generally occurs in steps and not from achieving large, predetermined
goals. It may follow that goals are often formulated after the fact; in other words,
organizational management attempts to validate the outcome by presenting it as if
it had been intended and planned (March 1981).

Contemporary research customarily portrays organizations as complex social sys-

tems governed by the interplay of various societal forces, management action being
only one of a number of factors. What happens in the environment of an organi-

zation, in its exchanges with other organizations, and through interaction of the

people who work within it, may often largely determine its range of choice and
even the best choice. Thus, customers are not the only significant factors in the

organization 's environment. For example, a number of studies show that organiza-
tions live in long-term relationships with each other, where it is often unclear who
controls whom and what (Hågg and Johanson 1982; Håkansson 1982; Johanson
and Associates 1994). Studies have shown, for example, that it is in these relation-
ships that technological development often occurs (Håkansson 1987).

It is also claimed that the specific technical arrangements used by a particular
organization, or in co-operation involving several organizations, are dependent on
the general technological development of society (e. g., Latour 1987; Law 1994).
Similar reasoning is applied to cultural aspects of society: norms, values, ideas,
knowledge, and ideologies which assume how organizational control is supposed

Is not very realistic. Nor is it clear


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

80 |
.

| aniza : |
n unique to a particular org tion. It is more

je organization will also be believed in
Nor may knowledge be regarded as generate
n organization. We return to these ideas |,
| ithin the
sively within

help to explain why the standard is designed as =
they may he | | seems to a very small extent t
Tok sort of thinking outlined above | | © have så

9000 standar. | > VICE Principles; ;
ISO problems connected with putting principles int hus

jer ag O Practice
Why do these specific principles become |

| p Stand
xplained: al) ards>
How can this be € | kable in view of the | ul
uld do so is all the more rema 8roWing CTItICism

i academia, over the last two OT three decades, of this kind of reasoning. The ri
in acadernld, m, which is based on empirical studies of how organizations funetig
å ae hal do, is that organizations do not serve as instruments for leis ;
achieve their goals. If goals are retrospective Ne just what do ig
ments of consistency between goals and results actually tell us:

a | ary research on organizations h
Thus, it is readily apparent that contempor | a8 had
vibcoally no influence on the ISO 9000 standard. Researchers in the field have been

highly critical of what this standard holds out as the hallmarks of quality in organi
zations. Later in this chapter we try to explain why standardizers have ignored the
findings of scholarly research. First, however, we discuss what seems to have been

preferred as the basis for the standard.

k These are seldot

wor |
. ve in O!

what people belie

DiMaggio and P

its way into the
it does not address the

The strong influence of popular management culture

Let us now compare ISO 9000 with what we call global popular management cul-
ture (Furusten 1999). We are referring here to discussion in popular books and art.
icles in the business press, at management development seminars, and between
consultants and clients. This discussion is not open to the kind of thinking that is
so prevalent in contemporary research on organizations.

The ISO 9000 standards are based on the idea that organizations should focus on
the customer, clearly allocate responsibility, be viewed as separate from their envi-
ronment, and have measurable goals. These are not new ideas, presented for the
first time in ISO 9000. Nor is it new that organizations are assumed to be con-
trolled by management, and should specify who does what. It comes as no Surprise,
either, to be told that organizational goals should be broken down into more
specific objectives for different groups and processes. Let us go back in time and see
where these ideas belong.

Scientific management can be seen as the first wave of managerial thinking to
achieve considerable popularity (Barley and Kunda 1992). The concept held that
every task must be analysed in minute detail; on the basis of this analysis, specific
techniques for performing the work would be developed and formalized. Once this
step was complete, employees could be trained with special manuals telling them
how to carry out their tasks. Production processes would then be as efficient as PO"
sible, it was believed. Optimal efficiency and maximum profit for the owners wer


THE KNOWLEDGE BASE OF STANDARDS 81

watchwords. The perspective was decidedly top-down; it was most important to

enable the owners of the company and their appointed managers to control the
business.

There are a number of differences between this

approach and ISO 9000, but
there are similarities as well. The

latter relate to the degree of detail and formaliza-
tion of each task. Every process is to be documented and monitored continually.

While putting less emphasis on direct supervisory control, ISO 9000 stresses that
each process must have an ‘owner’ in charge. It may seem somewhat far-fetched to
compare the documentation referred to in ISO 9000 with Taylor’s formalized
work manuals, but since the documentation is to be followed, the end result is sim-
ilar. The principal difference is that in ISO 9000 most of the documentation is to
mselves, who thus formalize their own duties. In sci-
entific management employees were not considered qualified for this task, which was
entrusted to time-and-motion specialists who worked hand in hand with manage-
ment. Another major difference is that ISO 9000 is intended to optimize efficiency
for the benefit of the customer, whereas Scientific management is aimed primarily at
maximizing the return to the owners on their investment.
Hence, what is embodied in an ISO standard is not scientific management in its orig-
inal form, despite certain basic similarities: a call for clarity and order, and for formal-
izing the system of processes. The difference boils down to the more humanitarian
tone of ISO 9000, based largely on the ideas of management by objectives and cus-
tomer orientation. Both of the latter have their own history; neither made its first
appearance in ISO 9000. In some respects their roots even go back to Taylor.

Taylor's ideas were developed further and popularized by others, including
Gulick and Urwick (1937), both Americans. Their version of Taylorism is sum-

marized in the acronym. POSDCORB (which stands for Planning, Organizing,
Staffing, Directing Co-Ordinating, Reporting, and Budgeting). Here organiza-
tional management is supposed to plan first, then lead, co-ordinate, monitor, and
control so that the plans are implemented. Essentially, organizations are to be
designed as tools for achieving their own goals and those of management.

These ideas were subsequently developed further by Peter Drucker, who has
been presented as the grand old man of the management gurus. Sometimes
Drucker is also regarded as the father of management by objectives, although
Rombach (1991) prefers to consider him as one of several pioneers. In any case,
Drucker's The Practice of Management, published in 1954, is a milestone in the spread
of the concept of management by objectives. To this day, management by objec-
tives is a dominating theme of many publications on management. For example, it
was central to the discussions in the 1980s on how to improve the efficiency of the
public sector in Sweden (Rombach 1991). It has also been claimed that most writ-
ing in the field of practical oriented management literature is based on POSD-
CORB (Mintzberg 1991), at least as far as the most widely read studies are
concerned (Furusten 1999). Consequently, since the standardizers primarily consist
of practitioners and consultants it is hardly surprising that these ideas have had an
influence on them.


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

82
ject I røin territory, eithe

he subject is not virgin territory, either, For ial

Jations side of t zat
The human relations side agement and control of Organizationg

. n |
pee, in recent popular ter awe step further 1n that its hum å
f | find that POSDCORB has been taken å an tel;
often fin

: discussion on what is ¢ 2
tions and psychosocial aspects (for example, 1n win = fotealidanedl- ri, oMMonly
known as human resource management) have be « MIS think;

t which like SO many oth | Ing
f the so-called human relations movemen å "er ideas
stems from n the United States. TWo leading re

orl inated 1 Pre.
on management and control orig! sed and Donald McGregor.

| | r Barn
sentatives of this school are Chester hed in 1938, Barnard held that Organiza.

| ve, publis

In The Functions of the Executive, P | ER

| | al systems for co-operation among individuals The
tions should be viewed as social Sy

| ee on wher

how to perform their tasks. What Barnard m “a0ns
lovees. If the goals of the formal organizati,
develop spontaneously among employee». © bdvallowed n
are to be achieved, these informal organizations must not . ; Owed to Brow too
strong; management must get them to share the views of t E ormal Organization,
For this purpose management has written and oral communication at its disposa}
In Barnard’s opinion, management can manipulate the group and teach them what
to do by formulating policies and objectives and distributing documents explaining
why and how they are to be pursued. At the same time, employees can learn why
and how certain tasks are to be performed. Barnard added that management jg
responsible for decisions affecting the business as a whole and for keeping employee
motivation at a peak. Only then, according to Barnard, can the formal organiza-
tion be efficient.

Reasoning along similar lines, McGregor (1960) criticized ideas that go back to
Taylor and others. McGregor, too, suggested motivation as an alternative, but he
placed greater emphasis than Barnard on the personal conduct of the manager.
According to McGregor, a manager should be a kind of guide or counsellor who
uses indirect means to see that his employees achieve the nght goals. While not
measuring whether and how individuals meet their personal goals, the manager
should encourage them to evaluate their own work. To assist employees in their
self-evaluation, he should be available for discussions with them.

These ideas expressed by Barnard and McGregor, as well as other writers, have
been developed further in more recent management literature. They are the very
core of the best seller in this entire field, In Search of Excellence, by Tom Peters and
Robert Waterman (1982). Roughly one million copies were sold in the first year
after publication; six years later, the figure had passed ten million (Thomas, 1989).
The authors hold that good organizations are dynamic, customer oriented, non-
bureaucratic, and led by individuals who can motivate employees and influence the
value system and culture of the organization so that employees are encouraged to
be creative entrepreneurs. For this purpose communication has to function well
within the organization; it is essential to spread fundamental values throughout the
organization so that they guide all operations.

Peters and Waterman also emphasized the need for firm principles of quality, ser-
vice, innovation, and experimentation, but to help the company grow rather than


THE KNOWLEDGE BASE OF STANDARDS 83

limit what it can do. Going beyond Barnard and McGregor, Peters and Waterman

added a number of features typical of å good organization. In addition to being cus-
romer oriented and non-bureaucratic, as mentioned above,

infused with an entrepreneurial spirit; in other words,
ative and to experiment continually in their se

organizations should be
organizations need to be cre-

arch for new products and new fields
of business. Similar reasoning can be found in subsequent literature on manage-

ment. Interesting examples are Osborne and Gaebler (1993) and Osborne and
Plastrik (1997), who discussed the Importance of non-bureaucratic but entrepre-
neurial and customer-oriented thinking for government agencies.

There are a number of similarities between the standard ultimately formulated in
ISO 9000 and dominant ideas in the global popular discourse about management
and leadership of organizations. Moreover, the standard appears to be based on the

most basic ideas in popular thinking; in other words, ISO 9000 has codified the lay-
man’s conception of a successful organization. Thus, the present standard may be

said to offer the tenets of an ideology on organizations. This ideology holds that
organizations are manageable and controllable units which can be used by man-
agement as instruments for fulfilling predetermined goals, strategies, and visions.

Why research has not influenced the standard

Standards always have some foundation in knowledge. We have compared ISO
9000 with academic thinking and with the conventional wisdom of popular man-
agement culture. The latter appear to have become the standard. Our analysis indi-
cates that certain kinds of knowledge, rather than others, more readily find their
way into a standard. The knowledge underlying standards does not necessarily
reflect an empirical reality: it is highly questionable whether the ISO 9000 standard
really codifies the existing practices of successful organizations. We shall conclude

by speculating on why the findings of scholarly research have apparently been
ignored.

One reason may be that the standardizers do not consider the research findings
indicative of the practices of successful organizations. Peters and Waterman (1982),
for example, maintained that existing research was based on studies of unsuccessful
organizations. Could the findings of that research, they asked, show anything other
than shortcomings in comparison with successful organizations? Yet Peters and
Waterman claimed to have studied only successful organizations, there being noth-
ing to learn from the failures. Other consultants, who also seem intent on taking an
academic approach (e.g. Rhenman 1969; Normann 1975), have gone even further;
they claimed that it would be morally wrong to consider unsuccessful examples in
trying to determine the best form of organization. Need we mention that the schol-
ars, to whom Peters and Waterman referred, have never admitted that their stud-
ies were limited to instances of failure only. And they would be likely to claim that
we have at least as much to learn from failures as from success.

There is another reason why the debate in academic circles has not influenced
the standard: not only have scholars found fault with rational models for control

a

-

ic TO i EEE PEER NEVE AN

tal Er ee


A WORLD OF sTANDARDS
84

and management of organizations, they have vn ps teen fs Ption
of being modern. Thus, indirectly they have al å p owth. and fhe ae
of modern society: that is, the notons of progie Bt bein po chef that
these can be realized through rational action, he even : Å Ed &CL With an
identifiable cause (cf. von Wright 1993). These øp ap Nå Sa 4 ee nalized
in modern society that people generally find it difficult to | — their grip
Explanations inconsistent with conventional a no a : y welcomed,
People repeatedly exposed to the same image OF the SUCLESSIU organization, in
their education, in the mass media, and in what they read, are constantly reminded
of an ideal world. They may well find it depressing to contrast the ideal with the
complexity and chaos of their own everyday lives. Perhaps not surprisingly, many
earn for rules that would reduce the complexity,
perhaps even re-create the ideal situation; finding ways to understand the com-
plexity is something they would rather not talk about. People want order and struc-
ture; they would like to believe that there is a relationship between success, growth,
and a certain kind of management on a practical level. That is what they would like

to hear. They need no reminding that everyday life in organizations can be diffi-
cult and demanding. |

Customers, suppliers, partners, financiers, Owners, employees, politicians, and
others often expect individual organizations to be presented in a way that inspires
confidence. For this reason, it is probably important to provide a clear, seemingly
logical presentation of what is seen as complex and chaotic. No wonder, then, that
managements of organizations are not overly receptive to the findings of research,
It is seldom appropriate for one’s own organization to come across to others as
uncontrollable and poorly co-ordinated.

We have asked why an ideal, rather than the findings of scholarly research, has
been established as a standard, and why what laymen are currently saying, rather
than what managers are actually doing, has been formally codified. Now we may
have an answer to our questions.

We may simply be expecting the impossible if we believe that we can glean rules
for what to do from contemporary research on organizations. As we know,
researchers are seldom prepared to transform their own knowledge of what is into
models for what should be. We also know that the purpose of a standard is to indi-
cate what is best for all concerned: in other words, to tell us what general form of
organization gives Customers optimal quality. If such is our aim, it may be out of
the question to take recommendations from actual practice, which is disparate and
unpredictable. Order and clarity are not always typical of what really goes on in
organizations. It is so much easier to relate to a discourse on general models which
are supposed to reflect what is going on in successful organizations.

people in these circumstances y


6

Organizing the Process of Standardization

KRISTINA [AMM HALLSTROM

In the preceding chapter we discussed the knowledge base of standards, using
the example of ISO 9000. In the present chapter we use the same example in
order to discuss how standards are developed. We use a study of ISO's
Technical Committee (TC) 176, which is responsible for the ISO 9000 stan-
dard, to analyse how international standards organizations create standards, and
how problems and ways of solving them are identified and discussed within the
organization. The study focuses on the organizational aspects of international
standardization work.

ISO is a private association of national standards organizations. Membership dues
provide 80 per cent of ISO's financing; the remaining 20 per cent comes from sales
of standards and other publications. There are tensions in such an organization. For
example, ISO must produce appropriate standards, and do this in an efficient way,
but there are also demands for participation, openness, and representation. We dis-
cuss these tensions here.

TC 176 is one of a number of technical committees within ISO. The empirical
material for our analysis consists of documents on strategy prepared by TC 176,
mostly during the period 1987—98, and from interviews with the drafters of these
documents. We also conducted in-depth interviews with other delegates to TC
176 of various nationalities (i.e., experts from the working groups), secretariat staff
and others. We studied the ISO directives, which provide the formal framework
for the process of developing the standard, and also directly observed the work ot
TC 176, both in the technical committee and its international working groups, and
at preparatory national work sessions of the Swedish members of TC 176.

A standards organization at work: TC 176

Standardized quality systems were developed for the US defence industry in the
1950s (Jönsson 1994). During the 1960s and 1970s, the idea of using quality stan-
dards to guarantee quality in production processes spread to other industries:
nuclear power, offshore oil drilling, and aerospace, for example (op. cit.). Several
national standards organizations began to develop their own standards for quality
systems, standards which were adapted to local needs. Referring to this growing
interest, the National Standards Institute of Germany, DIN, submitted a proposal

= > dt eet. oa Lae, Sov ‘+ vie: = Jw Jina


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

86

to ISO in 1977 for establishing an international technical committee for standard,
Oo . |

-O No. 20-77). ,
re ly involving the German, French, Canaq

international technical committee—p¢.
The purpose of the committee WAS to
management and quality assurance (Brief

relating to quality ( ass
After various discussions primat

and British standards organizations, an
176—was established at ISO in 1979.

develop international standards for qua |
open meeting, ISO/TC 176 QA). The first meeting of TC 176, he din

Ottawa in 1980, was attended by 36 people; today the committee has over three
hundred members and has become one of the largest of over two hundred techni.

cal committees reporting to ISO.

Organization and work procedures

Every technical committee at ISO has a formally assigned area of responsibility, In
the case of TC 176, the committee’s responsibility is to develop standards in the field
of general quality management, which includes quality pypterns, quality assurance,
and general supporting techniques to provide guidance in the selection and use of
these standards. The development of standards for specific products and services is
not part of the committee’s responsibility. The work of TC 176 is allocated to var-
ious subcommittees; each of these is divided into a number of working groups
charged with the drafting of standards. Each subcommittee has a chairman and a sec-
retary, and a project manager is formally in charge of each working group. Other
members of the working groups are experts in the group’s area of competence,

When TC 176 was established in 1979, its operations were divided among three
working groups. Today there are more than 20 working groups, each of which js
responsible for developing or revising a specific standard. The number of places for
experts in international working groups is limited. Experts are appointed by the
national member organizations. Over fifty countries are represented on TC 176. In
a typical group, work sessions are normally attended by 20 to 40 experts.The entire
technical committee and all its subcommittees and working groups meet once a
year. The working groups of SC2, the largest TC 176 subcommittee, hold an addi-
tional meeting for one week each year.

The standardization process at ISO must be structured according to ISO direc-
tives. These provide that a standards project must go through a number of specific
phases. In the proposal phase an idea is formally presented as an ISO proposal,
which includes a statement of what the standard is supposed to provide. The pro-
posal is then submitted to the relevant technical committee for a vote. A proposal
may be presented by a national standards organization, the secretariat of the tech-
nical committee or subcommittee, another technical committee or subcommittee
of ISO, a co-operative organization, the technical board of ISO, or the managing
director of ISO. A simple majority suffices for a project to be accepted and a work-
ing group appointed, In the preparatory phase the working group prepares a draft

standard, a process which can take several years. The principle of consensus is con-
sidered important in this phase.


ORGANIZING THE PROCESS OF STANDARDIZATION 87

When completed by the working group, the draft standard is passed on to the
technical committee and then referred to all members of the committee for com-
ment. After revision it acquires the status of a DIS (Draft International Standard).
The DIS is then referred to the entire membership of ISO for their comments and
vote. If the DIS is supported by a two-thirds majority, it is accepted and given the
status of an FDIS (Final Draft International Standard). There is still another vote in

the approval phase, when the FDIS is submitted to the entire membership of ISO.
Once an FDIS has been accepted in such a vote, no further changes may be made
in the text apart from very minor editing adjustments. When this phase is complete,
the draft may finally be published as an ISO standard. The technical committee is

responsible for reviewing the standard at least once every five years and for making
revisions if necessary.

Thus, a number of phases are involved in developing a draft standard; at several
points it is referred for comment to non-experts, who may thus influence the sub-
sequent work on it. Several votes are taken. The average length of time for an
international standards project to develop from an idea into a definite standard was

formerly seven years. Wishing to speed up the process of developing standards, ISO
in 1995 revised its directives. Now working papers must be prepared and available
when a new proposed standard is submitted to ISO. Time limits have become

much more restrictive, and if they are not observed a decision may be made to dis-
continue the work (ISO/IEC Directives—Part 1: Procedures, 1992 and 1995).

Participants

‘Expert’ is ISO's designation for a participant in the standardization process of the

working groups. A 1995 ISO directive contains the following statement about
experts in working groups:

A working group comprises a restricted number of individually appointed experts brought
together to deal with the specific task allocated to the working group. The experts act in a
personal capacity and not as the official representatives of the P-member or A-liaison orga-
nization by which they have been appointed. However, it is recommended that they keep
close contact with that P-member or organizations in order to inform them about the

progress of the work and of the various opinions in the working group at the earliest possi-
ble stage (ISO Directives—Part 1: Procedures, 1995).

Three categories of experts have been observed: (1) users of ISO 9000 standards;
participants in the work of TC 176 often represent major manufacturing compa-
nies which use the standards in their own operations; (2) participants from national
standards organizations; and (3) those affiliated with organizations such as univer-
sities, consulting firms, and certification bodies.

The relative representation of the three categories varies from one standards pro-

ject to another. In the area of quality, participants belong largely to the third cate-

gory—outside experts. Typically these are intermediary actors who transmit the
standards to users (Tamm Hallström 1996b). Examples of such intermediaries are

PENE. lt scm EE

88

consultants specializing 11 prep Gets wlio ovetsde and certify gh
ties relating to quality assurance, or certifier! € qual;

| : rs of major manufactur;
systems of organizations (Op. cit.). eT ha i : and te eames. Com.
panies (often members of the organizational ierarchy Presentatives gr

standards organizations may also be regarded as TN ies ep

This classification of participants may be somew . 8 Farticipants in
TC 176 quite often simultaneously belong to more | an ag er For exam.
ple, a consultant may also serve as a board member of a certification body. An inde.

pendent consultant may have previously EO IR ig
Ko | . Con Olve advis;
before resigning to start his/her own practice g advising

organizations on how to implement a quality >y" oe |
may also be retained by a certification organization to assist In ISO 9000 certifica-
tion, or they may perform similar work for a standards organization.

While it may be difficult to assign participants 1n TC 176 to any one Category,
all of them are considered experts in the field of quality assurance and quality man-
agement. More generally, we may note that a profession of quality experts has
begun to develop over the past twenty years OF SO (Mendel 1996, Tamm Hallström
1996). TC 176 has become a major international forum in which these experts can

discuss issues relating to quality.

A catalogue of problems

Aside from the technical process of standardization in the working groups,
activities take place in a number of special strategy groups where problems, solu-
tions, plans, and similar matters are discussed. Such deliberations may be con-
ducted by a permanent group such as the advisory group regularly summoned
by the chairman of the technical committee (ISO/IEC Directives—Part 1:
Procedures, 1992). Another way of responding to perceived problems is to
create a temporary working group or task force, usually referred to as an ad hoc

group (op. cit.), give it a specific assignment, and then disband it once it has
proposed a solution.

Over the years, we have witnessed the appointment of various discussion groups
and task forces to find solutions for certain strategic issues; normally some form of

written proposal is produced. When interviewed, one expert referred to this as a

Jungle of discussion groups’, adding that they sometimes competed with each

other. We shall see below what kinds of problems have been taken up in this
jungle.

Problems with numerous variations of a standard

The first problem has to do with variation. At TC 176 it soon became apparent that
the initial version of the ISO 9000 series, published in 1987, was a success and was

attracting a wide following, but clearly there were certain problems as well
(Marquardt et al. 1991). At the end of 1990, a temporary task force called Vision


ORGANIZING THE PROCESS OF STANDARDIZATION 59
2000 was appointed to study how the work of TC
| members were active in various working groups.

| group was to develop a strategic
mentation of the

176 should be continued: its six

The purpose of this temporary
plan for the structure, numbering, and imple-

nta ISO 2000 series. It had been observed that a growing number of
variations on the original ISO 9000 series were being developed for different types

of products, industries, and business sectors. This diversity was viewed as a prob-

lem; it was felt that the use and certification of different standards with inconsistent |
requirements would be an obstacle

trade.

Among the conclusions in the Vision 2000 document were that there should be
four general product categories embracing products of every kind, and that stan-
dards should be created only for these four categories. Also, efforts should be made
to prevent the emergence of inconsistent standards and new variations of standards.
The strategic plan that was presented aimed at tightening up all ISO 9000 standards

and ironing out the differences between them; the plan offered a general set of con-
cepts and common guidelines for future standardization.

In the spring of 1995 there was extensive discussion on the need to clarify the
concepts of Quality Assurance (QA) and Quality Management (QM) and the rela-
tionship between them (ISO/TC176/SC2/SC2CG/ N-30). For this purpose a
temporary strategy group, which came to be known as the QA/QM Task Force,
was appointed at the work group session that same spring. This step was prompted
by an increasing concern both at TC 176 and generally among users of standards:

as the number of working groups and projects grew, inconsistent standards had
often developed, and many standards were considered lengthy, repetitive, and dif-

ficult to understand.

The ten-page report presented by the task force at the 1995 autumn session rec-
ommended a new ‘architecture’ for the ISO 9000 standards; it would simplify the
ISO 9000 family, arrange it more rationally, and improve its internal consistency.
In the report, problems perceived as related to the QA and QM concepts were
discussed and illustrated with specific examples, but questions remained as to the
difference and precise relationship between the two concepts.

The study of concepts had also been discussed outside the Vision 2000 group and
the QA/QM Task Force. For example, written comments had been submitted by
active members of TC 176. In addition, a report on problems related to QA/QM
had been prepared by a special Terminology Task Force of Subcommittee One
(SC1), which is responsible for the development of concepts at TC 176.

rather than an encouragement to international

Problems due to lack of co-ordination

The second problem was a lack of co-ordination. The SPAG (Strategic Planning

Advisory Group) was a temporary group charged with monitoring the progress of
Vision 2000. SPAG was created at the 1993 autumn session. The group discussed
problems connected with the increase in the number of ISO 9000 standards—from

six of them in 1987 to 19 only seven years later. Other matters discussed were how


A WORLD OF STANDARDS
90

ganized and the relations of TC 176 with ‘i
t of the group repeatedly emphasize dot

rt of a larger trend towards internations
hich also included systems for ir

the work of TC 176 should be or

standards organizations. ÅS the repor
> - - a

was happening in the area of quality was Pp

JE t Systems, W

standardization of managemen ar
e important to ensure

mental and health-care management. It would p that those

. | encounter problems,
using different standards simultaneously did not p and also to

: in each area.
see that the various systems met legal å aes et
It would also be necessary tO establish clear and € etween the

activities of TC 176 and those of the other parties involved. Among the Other
organizations and units cited were [SO’s central secretariat and other technica]
committees responsible for various areas of control, such as environmental.
management systems, member organizations, industry organizations, and region.]
regulatory bodies (ISO/TC176/ SPAG/N66, 1995). | ka

Like the Vision 2000 document, the SPAG report included a discussion of the
problems with this series of standards and the need to develop a series that Was uni-
form and consistent. The report also recommended greater co-ordination with var-
‘ous technical committees and other important producers of standards and rules in

the field of management. cable
Another step in the effort to improve co-ordination among the TC 176 work-

ing groups was the establishment in 1996 of a temporary Project Task Group. This
group was charged with preparing a proposal for changing the structure of the
organization; the new structure would improve the efficiency of the various work-
ing groups of the technical committee and make it possible to manage these groups

more effectively:

A project team approach is proposed to manage the co-ordinated development of the new

9001 and 9004. The project team should consist of a strong project manager, a small project
management group, and the managers of the subprojects of 9001 and 9004. Together with

the subproject managers, the project manager would ensure throughout the development
program that the individual standards meet the requirements of their respective specifica-
tions, and have consistent primary goals, scopes and contents as well as consistent structures

(ISO/TC176/SC2/N298).

The discussion on strategy during the spring of 1996 was largely about creating
this project group and who would be included in it. A group of 12 people from
TC 176/SC2 was formally appointed in June 1996. The most urgent problem
addressed by the group concerned structure and work methods—specifically, the
lack of co-ordination among the various working groups of TC 176. The 1995
QA/QM report had already indicated that the new project group would propose
a drastic reduction in the number of working groups (and experts) at Subcommittee

Two as a means of improving the co-ordination. Thus, the structural changes pro-
posed in this report were far-reaching.


ORGANIZING THE PROCESS OF STANDARDIZATION 91

Problems of standards unrelated to user needs

As we have noted above, many of the actors in the area of quality are so-called
intermediaries; they pass the standards on to users but are not users themselves. In
a number of discussions on strategy at TC 176, it has been said that users might not
be satisfied with the standards produced. The third problem, then, is that the stan-
dards are not always what users want. The European Industry Expert Group (the

Industry Group for short), is a discussion group of TC 176 which was started infor-
mally in 1993 (XB272-6593/RG)

malized (ISO/TC176/SC2/N331).

Characteristic of the Industry Group is its emphasis on the interests of users, even
though the members of the group are not necessarily users themselves. The users
in focus are not just major manufacturing industries, but also smaller companies and
service enterprises. The following suggestions are indicative of what has been dis-
cussed in this group: standards should not be overly specialized or abstruse; when a
standard is revised, unnecessarily radical changes should be avoided, since these
would make it more difficult to use the standard; new standards projects should be
based on user needs rather than ideology.

The importance of satisfying user needs has been a recurring point of debate at
TC 176. In addition to the strategy groups previously mentioned, there is a group
called the Delegation Leaders Meeting (DLM), which was constituted and given
formal status in the late 1990s. The DLM meets twice a year, at the same time as
the working groups. The DLM has become an increasingly important forum as
internal discussion on the need for reorganization at TC 176 has intensified; one
indication is the growing interest in DLM meetings and attendance there.

A document prepared by the group, ‘TC 176 Vision, Mission, and Key

Strategies’, was presented at a meeting in 1995. It laid out the following objectives
for the organization:

; Its work has subsequently become more for-

* identify and understand user needs in the field of quality management;

¢ develop standards that respond effectively to user needs;

* support implementation of these standards; and

* facilitate meaningful evaluation of the resulting implementations using the ISO process to
achieve international consensus, and compatibility with other ISO/IEC management

standards (ISO/TC176/N242).

This excerpt illustrates the importance that TC 176 attaches to satisfying user
needs but also the difficulty of maintaining the link to users in the process of stan-
dardization. Standards should satisfy user needs and be easy to follow. However, it
has proven quite difficult to bring users into the international working groups; most
people attracted to TC 176 are intermediaries. TC 176 seems to be dealing with
this dilemma by continuing to discuss user interests, emphasizing the development
of standards in response to user needs, and maintaining a dialogue with user groups.


A WORLD OF STANDARDS
92

|
|
i
|
|

Problems with self-generated interests

not explicitly discussed in the documents studied, but raj
ISed |

during interviews, concerned the oA eens pag of both individ) CXper,
and working groups (cf. Tamm Hallström 19 ). We ave seen that the ere
'n number of ISO 9000 standards was perceived as a serious problem, and ny
efforts were made to improve the standards and the co-ordination between to. MG
jects. To some extent the expansion of standardization projects has also been linke i 3
to problems with the organization itself, such as its strong survival spririt, Combined
with a lack of certain rules. As a Swedish interviewee put It:

‘And there are no really good rules which are applied when a standard Or a standar dization
field is to be qualified for a standardization project. There 1s just the voting (one vote for
each country), so I think that it is a little bit too easy to start such projects. Once the old
is going on, these working groups have an enormous survival spirit and it is impossible to
stop them. In case the project 1s completely rejected or refused by the public Opinion, the
working group finds a new way of presenting the project and the work can go on,’

Another interviewee talked about the self-generated interests of experts and

working groups:

‘There is often a generating interest, once a standard is established and published, that you
want to start something new. You review old standards, but there might also exist an idea
about doing another standard within a certain field. And then it becomes a kind of
autonomous process, I believe. I think this is the case with a lot of standards, and not only
within this committee.’

Voting procedures have also been seen as unsatisfactory. One interviewee talked
about the many unconsidered yes-votes:

‘Every member country has a vote, regardless of the size of the country. Many countries
are not that active, some fairly new members, not only industrial countries but also third
world countries, or newly industrialized ones. Malaysia, Brazil and some African countries,
When a new work item is proposed, there are many yes-votes because many of these coun-
tries that are not active, they always vote for yes. Yes, because they do not have a reason to
vote no. If you vote no, this means that you need to study the problem and have a reason
for your standpoint. If you don’t do that—and | suspect that not many countries spend
much time on this—then you vote yes and the proposal gets through. This is a problem, | |

think.

Thus, not only the survival spirit of and the interests generated among experts
and working groups have been regarded as problematic, but also the procedures
directing the work of TC 176, for example when a new project is to be started, as
indicated in one of the quotations above. As we saw earlier, some efforts have been
made to change the procedures by revising the ISO directives. Among other things,
there are now more stringent requirements on proposals for new work items.

ha have briefly described the process of standardization in the working groups:
and have noted that TC 176 at various times set up strategic forums for discussing


ORGANIZING THE PROCESS OF STANDARDIZATION 93

various problems and solutions. We have identified a number of discussion themes:
(1) the emergence of numerous variations of standards, each with somewhat dif-
ferent requirements; (2) lack of co-ordination both within the group and between
TC 176 and other standardizers; (3) the chronic weakness of ties with users; and (4)
the problem of self-generated interests among both individual experts and working

groups.

Different principles of organization

We now examine how the description of TC 176—its organization and work pro-
cedures as well as the various discussion themes—can be analysed by means of a
model that includes four different principles of organization. The principles con-
cern the perceived mission of an international standardization body and the various
ways in which the work of developing international standards is organized and
managed. The model is presented in the figure below.

Expertise Representation
Organizing
international
standardization
User orientation Participation

—————

Fic. 6.1. Four principles of organization for an international standardization body

First we discuss each of these principles, then we focus on the tensions produced
in the work of TC 176 by multiple and sometimes inconsistent requirements for

organizing and regulating the work.

Expertise

The organization of TC 176 is heavily influenced by the principle of expertise. It
is indicative that participants in the work of standardization are called experts, who

engage in the technical work of drafting standards. These experts work in the tra-
dition of rationalizing society and standards play a central role in this rationalization

project. By virtue of their technical expertise, experts are implicitly considered best
qualified to decide how a standard should be formulated. The majority of the

RE MØ


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

94

"ss1onal experts in
ompanies; they may be viewed as a group of ii PE Å vir the field of
EE | : is defined as technical, and ;
quality and business management. Their work i wih bien di dis orga.
nized in the various technical commuttees and working group: e technica

specifications are drafted. | |
In general; experts are understood to be neutral and independent: they con.

tribute their technical expertise to the development of appropriate standards for

many other parties (Sikka and Willmott 1995). The notion of expert and expertise
also includes ideas of how experts work. By following pr ofessionally developed rules

and concepts, experts can guarantee their ri RT and yal pirate of
high-quality standards (cf. Abbott 1988). According to ap ba soar Ad par-
ticipants in the process of global standardization are typically motivated by a desire
to strive for a common objective, and to improve efficiency and global Welfare
These authors portray the work of standardization at the two standards organiz..

tions that they studied as free from political manipulation. |

This description does not apply to TC 176. While people in TC 176 share a
strong belief in scholarship and technical progress, and expertise Is a central prin-
ciple of organization, we have observed conflict between different groups of
experts. In fact, the principle of expertise 1s not the only one observed in the work
of TC 176.

Representation

Representation is a second principle of organization. The process of standardiza-
tion is often described as being open to different interests and to all the parties con-
cerned, as are governmental rule-setting processes. In governmental rule-setting
processes there is an explicit mission related to the work: to serve and work in the
public interest. Such a mission is not made explicit in the work of TC 176.
However there are several organizational traits linked to the principle of openness

and representation that usually can be linked to the mission of serving the public
interest.

Steps have been taken to live up to this principle. Through provisions regulat-
ing voting procedures and the circulation of proposals for review, the ISO direc-
tives enable various interest groups to influence the work of standardization. Draft
standards are submitted several times to members and to other interest groups. The
rules for ISO membership also reflect a principle of representation: ISO is made up
of representatives from different countries. Over the years IC 176 has also placed
growing emphasis on its status as a truly international Organization developing
international standards. For example, appropriate geographic representation has
been considered important in the appointment of various Strategic working groups.
For this purpose the world is divided into five major regions, all of which are sup-
posed to be represented, as in the Chairman’s Advisory Group (CAG). The empha-

sis on geographic representation is also apparent from the comments of different

countries; the comments are channelled via the national member organizations,


ORGANIZING THE PROCESS OF STANDARDIZATION 95

whose views are then considered. Work sessions are arranged at various locations
throughout the world. Care is taken not to favour one continent over others. After
the first TC 176 meeting in Ottawa, Canada, in 1980, plenary sessions of the
Technical Committee have been held in Germany (1981), France (1 982), Sweden

(1983), Japan (1985), Italy (1986), the United States (1988), Portugal (1989),

Switzerland (1990), Spain (1991), Australia (1992), Hungary (1993), Canada
(1994), South Africa (1995), and Great Britain (1996).

User orientation

User orientation is a third principle of organization. One recurring problem at TC
176 has been that the standardization work is not linked to the interests of users.
There have been various attempts to deal with this problem. The Industrial Group,
in particular, has stressed that all new projects should be prompted by user needs
rather than ideology.

Somewhat paradoxically, it has been difficult to bring users into the international
working groups at TC 176. As mentioned previously, most of those interested in
participating have been intermediaries. However, the formal procedure of referral
for comment has given users and other potential interest groups a way to influence
the process of standardization. On many occasions user interests have also been
treated in various discussions on strategy. One of the explicit objectives of TC 176,
as we saw in the earlier discussion of the document ‘Vision, Mission, and Key
Strategies’ (ISO/TC 176/N242) is to serve the interests of the users.

There is also a question of efficiency in relation to meeting user needs. A num-
ber of changes to ISO’s directives were made in 1995 to improve the efficiency of
standardization procedures. The process of developing standards was considered
too time consuming. ISO sought to speed up the circulation of proposals for
review, while also taking other steps to become more efficient in meeting and ful-
filling user needs. At the same time, the organization retained the formal rules gov-
erning the phases of developing standards, the circulation of proposals for review,
and voting procedures. ISO’s work on its strategy appears to reflect an ambition to
be a self-critical organization that seeks to improve its operations and their effi-
ciency.

TC 176 is systematically looking for ways to become more efficient. For several
years the Working group 15 at TC 176 has been involved in a project termed
‘Quality Management Principles’. The purpose of the project has been to identify
the general principles of leadership and organization on which the ISO 9000 stan-
dards are based; one of these principles is the necessity for continuing improve-
ment. From all the discussions on strategy and proposals for organizational change,
we may conclude that TC 176 1s seriously trying to improve its own efficiency as
well, in order to better meet needs of the users and the market—in other words,

to practise what it preaches.


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

96

Participation

GE AT implicit miss |
A fourth principle of organization IS linked to a nor på on of Ser ving
the principals. As mentioned above, international standaraization bodies are Private

and there is no public budget financing their work. The financial structure Of stan.

dardization work is close to an ideal of the market, with the participants Paying

most of the costs themselves. Thus, in this way strong private Interests are able t,
influence what is standardized (and what 18 not standardized) as well as the shape of

the standards. | ir |
It could be thought that the individual experts paying for this costly work, and

not permitted to advance any personal interests, would complain about such an
unfair financial structure, but the members of TC 176 have not made any particu.
lar complaints about this. However, TC 176 has perceived some problems with

one-sided participation and financing. Many consultants and quality managers are
attracted to the work of TC 176, contributing with expertise and resources to the
drafting of ISO 9000 standards. Within TC 176 these experts are perceived as hav.
ing great competence in, and knowledge of the field of quality, but there are also
some problems of legitimacy in relation to intermediaries. The potential business
gains linked to the work of private consultants working in this ‘million-dollar
industry’, as one interviewee put it, is one source of legitimacy problems. We must
point out that such legitimacy problems were not explicitly discussed in the docu-
ments studied, but were brought up during individual interviews.

Conflicts between different principles

IC 176 must consider several different factors in organizing its work. The empha-
sis varies Over time and depends on who happens to be most active in the debate.
To some extent, the four principles of organization are in conflict. Some tensions
were noted above, for example those related to the financial structure and to the
mux of private and public interests. We now turn to tensions that are produced by
conflict between the principles of organization. We examine three areas of conflict
in particular: conflict between expertise and user orientation, between expertise
and representation, and between representation and user orientation.

Between expertise and user orientation

Participants in the work of TC 176 are referred to as experts. They are supposed
to be neutral and independent, and to use their expertise to develop standards. But
the process of developing standards to date shows that the neutrality of experts can-
not always be taken for granted. Serving as an expert may be inconsistent with rep-
resenting the users of a standard. As we have seen, the ISO definition of an expert

reflects this contradiction. In a working group an expert not only provides specific,

individual expertise unrelated to nationality, but also may be regarded as repre-
senting a particular interest.


ORGANIZING THE PROCESS OF STANDARDIZATION 97

Hypothetically, experts in a particular technical field might tend to be found in
industries and companies which use that technique in their production processes

‘ på

Where this hypothesis is borne out by the facts, (at least some) user interests will be
considered, while at the same time the work of standardization will be done by
experts in the field, since the experts and the users will be the same. In the area of
quality, however, many experts are from the intermediary sector; they may be
organizational consultants, for example. It is mostly intermediate actors like these
who apply to join TC 176, people who possess the necessary competence, and who
are prepared to spend time and money on participating in international work ses-

sions. While consultants are generally appreciated as neutral experts in their field,
they have been criticized for having a pecuniary interest as intermediaries.

Motivated by self-interest, consultants might tend to draft overly complicated stan-

dards, thus creating a market for themselves, indeed a profitable one.
The lack of ties to the use of standards

| | is often brought up as a problem in inter-
nal discussions at TC 176. Doubts are raised about experts who are neither users

themselves nor connected with user interests, since there might be a conflict
between the respective views of users and experts as to what should be standard- |
ized and what form the,standards should take. Here the experts would be seeking
to use standards to create a better world. It may be noted that the Industry Group

mentioned above has warned against initiating projects for such ideological reasons,
rather than developing standards which users want and need. Individual experts

have also complained in interviews that there are too few participants from user
industries and too many experts from the intermediary, non-user sector. The crit-
ics not only mentioned consultants, but also referred to non-user experts as ‘pro-
fessional standardizers’ and ‘standardization bureaucrats’. The disproportionate

number of non-user experts has not only isolated the work of standardization from

practical reality and user needs; it also appears to have raised the more fundamen-
tal question of legitimacy.

Between expertise and representation

Another aspect of the complicated role of the expert is the relationship between a
participant in the work of TC 176 and his or her national delegation. The partici-
pants from the same nation make up a national delegation; one person is appointed
leader of the delegation and casts that country’s vote. The voting procedure is thus
based on nationality. Each delegation also meets on a more informal basis during a
work week, during breaks, and after the day’s work to discuss what has happened
in the various working groups or at strategy meetings.

The various national views play an important part in the process of standardiza-
tion. They are submitted as written comments which are used at work group meet-
ings. When the written comments are discussed, the views of a particular country
will normally be presented orally by a representative of that country. Although pre-

senting a national viewpoint, this participant must here, too, remain an objective
individual expert.


A WORLD OF STANDARDS
98

Is a participant a neutral expert or the EGNE
The ambiguous role of participants was — aac 176. How importa 2 been
readily apparent at the work group meetings pr al RTE Hp på are the
written comments of various interest groups an øp Pai 4 © the opin.
ions of the experts present? The process of stan n a mrd € viewed ag an
open one which many interests can influence by submi rn an et in
that case the principle of representation would appear = a Pa he oppo-
site would be to let the design of standards be determined primarily by the attend.
ing participants. | | 4 å

Still another example of the conflict between expertise an representation IS the
increasingly international character of the work of TC 176. Indicatively enough,
there has been a change in the principle for appointing experts to the chairman’.
advisory group. Formerly the chairman of the technical committee personally
selected a number of advisers for the group; nowadays It 1s important to see that al]
corners of the globe (the five regions) are represented. This new criterion for
appointing advisers to the chairman has become a significant factor in the process
of standardization.

Between representation and user orientation

There is also conflict between the principles of representation and user orientation,
as is evident when the concept of a fair process according to rules is compared with
the logic of action and effectively meeting market needs in the business world. To
a considerable extent, discussions on strategy have been devoted to ways of speed-
ing up the process of standardization and making it more efficient. The 1995 revi-
sion of the ISO directives was one result of this effort to improve efficiency. To
this end, stricter time limits were set, while the substance of the process, with its
voting procedure and circulation of proposals for review, was preserved. Although
the ISO directives apply to all technical committees of ISO, the directives received
special mention in the discussions on TC 176.

II poses a particular problem for standards organizations, torn as they are
between the search for efficiency and adherence to time-consuming procedures for
the sake of fairness (Stuurman 1995). In view of the rapid technological develop-
ment in IT, the dilemma is especially acute for standardizers in this area. As
Stuurman notes: ‘Bureaucratic restrictions, but also the effort to achieve consensus
and the use of strict rules of procedure, make it impossible to keep up with the
demands of governments (EU), suppliers, and users’ (1995, p. 509).

We are familiar with this dilemma from what we know about TC 176. Even if
the time required to develop a standard were successfully reduced (with the help of
changes in ISO directives), there would stil] be a considerable cost in time, money,
and effort. As one participant jokingly commented in an interview, instead of the

massive effort spent on developing standards each year by more than three hundred
experts at TC 176 and by referral organizations, the same results could probably be

achieved in a few months by a much smaller group of hard-working consultants,


ORGANIZING THE PROCESS OF STANDARDIZATION 99

and at much less cost to all concerned. But no matter how efficient this procedure,

it would not satisfy the requirement of representation: the same participant added
that no standard developed in this way could ever gain acceptance.

However, other work at TC 176 is less restricted by rules than the standardiza-

tion process itself, and it also poses less of a conflict between representation and user
orientation. Even though the ISO directives include certain rules governing the
appointment and functioning of temporary task forces, these can operate more
freely and informally than the regular working groups concerned with drafting
standards. So, too, can advisory bodies charged with ‘assisting the chairman and the
secretariat with co-ordination, planning, and control of the work of the commit-
tee or with other specific duties of an advisory character’ (ISO/IEC Directives—
Part 1: Procedures, 1995). Since it is not specified who may participate in the
advisory groups, they are even less formal than the task forces, which by directive
must include experts from the committee. But as previously mentioned, it has also

become more important in practice for these groups to represent a suitable geo-
graphic cross-section of participants.

Dealing with conflicting principles

In this chapter we have described and analysed the functioning and problems of an
international standards organization as it develops standards. TC 176 has often con-
sidered how its work is organized. Here we have discussed four principles of orga-
nization: expertise, representation, user orientation, and participation. The use of
different and sometimes contradictory principles of organization has been a source
of conflict in developing ISO 9000 standards. We have discussed some of the con-
flicts of this nature at TC 176, and attempts by the standards organization to deal
with them.

As we have shown, certain principles of organization may appear to be especially
important in particular phases of the work, but none may be ignored at any time.
The management of the technical committee must meet demands that are some-
times inconsistent. Despite the resulting strains, we have found TC 176 to be a suc-
cessful organization. It has been able to develop and publish (via ISO) standards
which command a wide following. In the next chapter we examine another inter-

national organization, where standards develop through processes that are different
from the ones used in TC 176.


/

Arenas as Standardizers

KERSTIN SAHLIN- ANDERSSON

In the previous chapter we described a standards organization, an organization with
the explicit purpose of providing standards. But there are numerous other organj-

zations that provide standards even if this is not their official or main purpose.
Among them are many organizations whose task is to be arenas: they should pro-
duce and provide information and comparisons, report and Propose initiatives for
change, and generally facilitate exchange of experience, ideas, and ideals. Not least.
many international organizations that have emerged during the last century have
been intended to work as arenas, where people from different countries can share
each other’s ideas and experience. Even though these organizations have no
explicit mandate to standardize, they still tend to provide recipes for others to fol-
low. They represent cases of unplanned standardization.

In this chapter we describe one such organization, PUMA, and explain why it
ended up producing standards although this was not its original purpose. PUMA is
a committee of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development,
OECD. PUMA serves as an arena where representatives of the OECD countries
can learn and share their ideas and experience concerning the development of pub-
lic management. In the chapter we show how PUMA emerged as an organization
and explain how it developed into a standardizer, and we describe and explain the
character of the standards it generated.

One line of explanation relates to the way in which PUMA collects, compares
and disseminates information. In the form of standardization described here, repre-
sentatives of different countries do not meet to negotiate a set of standards. Rather,
standardization is a by-product of meetings held for other purposes; at these meet-
ings various kinds of experience are presented, compared, and reformulated to
achieve consistency in form and context. The process of gathering, handling, and
disseminating such information is described below as 4 process of editing. We

describe how such editing proceeds and how it leads to the formulation and dis-
semination of standards.

A second line of explanation lies in the origin and development of PUMA and
the conditions which govern it. International organizations may hold themselves
out as neutral arenas of interaction, but they aré not, any more than other organi-
zations are. International organizations not only co-ordinate and mediate interests
and ideas. As is true for all organizations. international organizations influence and


—000--

ARENAS AS STANDARDIZERS 101

shape the activities that take place there (Finnemore 1996, Mörth 1996). How the
organization conducts its operations is dependent on its environment and what it
must do to be considered important and worth dealing with. The latter is relevant
to the way in which the organization obtains legitimacy and resources. Producing
standards seemed to be one way for PUMA to maintain its legitimacy as an inde-
pendent and neutral arena and at the same time show results so that it would obtain
resources and support from its environment.

The chapter is based on a study conducted in 1996, thus, the data refer to situ-
ations and operations as they appeared at that time. The study included an analysis
of the documents produced by PUMA, interviews with PUMA officials and dele-
gates, and observations from a two-day meeting with the PUMA committee
(Lerdell and Sahlin-Andersson 1997).

We begin by describing PUMA and the standards it produced and disseminated.
We then develop the two lines of explanation mentioned above for why this stan-
dardizer and its standards were designed as they were. First we describe how the
standards were developed. Then we discuss the conditions governing the opera-
tions and continued existence of this arena. We conclude by noting that while the

process of international co-operation may generate users of standards, it does not
necessarily make states more receptive to the standards.

An arena serving as a standardizer

PUMA was formed in 1990 as one of OECD’s committees. PUMA stands for both
the Public Management Service and the Public Management Committee. The
committee directs the work of PUMA and consists of representatives of the OECD
member countries. The work programme is carried out by the Public Management
Service in collaboration with appointed experts. The committee meets twice a year
at the OECD, where decisions are taken on PUMA’s focus of activity and pro-
gramme. At its meetings the committee also discusses subjects and reports prepared
by the secretariat and various working groups. Participants share their experience
and information on what is happening in their own national administrations.
Aside from committee meetings, PUMA organizes groups of national represen-
tatives in a number of areas; each group arranges working meetings, symposia, sem-
inars, etc. These are administered by the secretariat, who also prepare and follow
up activities by producing documentation and publishing reports, as well as in other

ways.

Work programme and reports

At the time of our study, PUMA conducted three principal work programmes.
One programme was called “Governance and Public Management’. Here strategies
for strengthening central management and control of state administration were dis-
cussed and distributed. Reports also dealt with the issue of how to give central
administration a more strategic orientation to enable it to avoid being limited to


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

102
d erns. Methods for conducting studies on the future and for think
av-to-day CONCEEM: | : mme was i
day to-day ily were emphasized. A second progra | called ‘Perf, Ea
ing strategically ; Reports were written and Meetings i

ources .

nent of resol | |
C ‘on. and on how to design effectiv

nce evaluation, on € syste il

dgeting—with special emphasis on cost cutting and ;

‘sms in the public sector. Other issues ;
| ket mechanisms 1N fn
ducing and using mar

- nt control, and ho f
‘on of political control from management | W fo
the separation of Pp loyment could be designed. A third programme wa

round issues concerning ‘Regulatory management and reform’. This pro
as designed to simplify legislation and reduce the number of state rules
W | |

harmonize legislation internationally. The work included efforts to find ¢

f oreater self-regulation. | |
O The clearest and most widely distributed results of PUMA’s work were the ei.

ten reports. Some reports were devoted to a single issue, while others were Part of
a regular series. By the autumn of 1996, PUMA had published some sixty reports,

‘1 addition to a number of less official documents. A typical PUMA report Would
focus on some aspect of one of the areas mentioned above; the presentation would
be organized in the same way for all countries SO as to permit comparison,
Promising attempts at reform would be described, and aspects that were relevant
for implementation would be highlighted. Often the reports would include a num-
ber of key indicators that summarized the reforms.

Issues of the kind dealt with in PUMA were widely discussed throughout the
Western world during the 1990s, and extensive reforms have been carried out
(Hood 1995; Olsen and Peters 1996; Olson et al. 1998). These issues have been
subsumed under the common heading “New Public Management’ (e.g. Pollitt
1993; Hood 1995; OECD 1995; Cheung 1996; Lerdell and Sahlin-Andersson
1997; Christensen and Legreid 1998). Studies of the New Public Management
trend have shown that the ideas and reforms carried out exhibit a certain set of fea-
tures. New Public Management ideas are universal in that they are applicable
everywhere, regardless of special circumstances in different countries. They are
general in that they state how organizations in general should be managed, con-
trolled, and organized. They are apolitical in the sense that they are defended on
the basis of expertise rather than ideology, and presented as free from ideological
considerations (Hood and Jackson 1991: Boston et al. 1996).

New Public Management has sometimes been described as a school of ideology
that has emerged as different countries have tried to copy each other. However, as
more systematic reviews of the reforms undertaken in various countries have
shown, it is hard to identify any particular country that set the whole process 1n
motion. Those countries which were reformed along the lines of New Public
Management differed in regard to political orientation, the economy, and the size
of the public sector (Hood 1995). Admittedly, there was evidence of countries
imitating and referring to each other, but by and large the reforms do not apped!
to have been based on practices that were imitated and passed on from one cour:
try to the next. What emerges instead is a pattern of standardization.

and the manage!
methods for performa

audit, control, and bu

[Ms of
formed
Samme
» and to
Xamples


ARENAS AS STANDARDIZERS 103

And as we point out below, PUMA is an important source and mediator of New
Public Management ideas. In fact several of the above-mentioned publications on
the New Public Management trend were at least partly based on data from PUMA
reports. This indicates that PUMA is an important collector, summarizer, and dis-
seminator of information about New Public Management. In the next section we
show that PUMA plays a more active role, as a mediator and editor of experience

and ideas—ideas that have taken the form of a sets of standards that are distributed
in the PUMA publications.

Standards

How can we say that PUMA’s work resulted in standards, and what were the spe-
cial features of these standards? In PUMA’s publications and at its meetings, empha-
sis was repeatedly placed on the general features of the reforms and country
presentations. Reports were not prepared on individual countries, but on specific
subjects. National representatives summarized the material from different countries
which served as the basic documentation for the reports. Some of the most widely
distributed reports were based on questionnaires in which the OECD countries had
been asked to indicate what reforms they were conducting or planning for man-
agement, control, and organization in the public sector. The results of national
reform initiatives were neither requested nor studied to the same degree.

PUMA did not issue binding rules and had no authority to do so. PUMA pro-
vided general advice for improving the public sector. The proposed solutions were
presented as a series of recommendations together with instructions on how to
implement them. Thus general and universal models were formulated and dissem-
‘nated for how the OECD countries should reform the public sector. These mod-
els were not related to any specific ideology but were argued for in terms of
expertise. In other words, PUMA formulated and transmitted standards rather than
providing examples or advice for particular countries. Adopting these standards was
1 choice which countries were advised to make, on the assumption that the public
sectors in all countries were facing similar situations and similar problems.

Standardization by editing

In previous studies the OECD has been described as an information system
(Sjöstedt 1973), a harmonizing agent (Harrison and Mungall 1990), an active dis-
seminator of ideas and ideals (Egeberg 1978; Olsen and Peters 1996), and a driving
force and creator of national ideas and ideals (Finnemore 1992, Mörth 1996). What

PUMA did was to process 'nformation—collecting, editing, and distributing it.
Our purpose in this section 1s to show how general standards emerge in the edit-

ing process involved in international
PUMA's principal reports in detail.

co-operation. To illustrate, we analyse one of

eres


104 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

From reform initiatives to standards

One of the most widely distributed PUMA reports IS a Governance ts
Transition: Public Management Reforms in OECD Countries (PUMA 1995). Describe d

as a summary of PUMA’s first five years, the report has been ae oa NUmerouyg
national debates on the management, control, and reforming ° the public Sector.
The preface expressed the hope that the gr would gpa nes With 4
basis for comparison and evaluation-of national reform initiatives an stated that it
was intended to aid countries in their learning process. The report was divided Into
four parts. It began with the conclusions of the committee. Recent Public man-
agement reforms in the member countries were presented in the following 13
chapters. These were followed by four chapters in which specific themes in Which
PUMA has been engaged were discussed more thoroughly, The report was pre-
pared in close co-operation between the PUMA secretariat and national represen-
tatives. The data given by the countries themselves on their reform initiatives Were
presented in the report and provided the basis for comparisons and standards

The design of the report is interesting from the perspective of standardization.
From information on reform activities in each member country, it developed a col-
lection of standards for management, control, and change in public administration.

The entire report emphasized reforms. Specific countries were identified as
examples to follow. Direct references to the reform attempts in specific countries
were made in the form of excerpts from statements by representatives of the mem-
ber countries. It was emphasized repeatedly that even though public management
reforms have been inspired by ‘best practice’ in the private sector, ‘in the public
sector they are, in many respects, journeys into unknown territory’ (p. 27). It was
also said that ‘there is no single model of reform; there are no off-the-shelf solu-
tions’ (p. 25). Thus, it was seen as important continually to follow up and evaluate


ARENAS AS STANDARDIZERS 105

sent a paradigm shift’ (p. 25). Key concepts in the new paradigm were decentral-
ization, Management, result-orientation, autonomy, and flexibility. These key
words were explained more specifically. For instance, it was emphasized that flex-
ibility required delegation; an oft-repeated slogan was, ‘Let managers manage’.
Competition was advocated, and paragraphs were devoted to particular techniques
for management in a competitive environment, such as citizen vouchers and con-
tracting out. Also stressed was the power of example; a number of visible changes
should be chosen as examples that would spark further change. In addition, top

management had to ‘maintain and develop strategic capacities’ (p. 10) if reform of
the public sector was to be successful.

The character of the standards

Even though the PUMA publication presented certain countries as examples, it
repeatedly emphasized that the models and recommendations presented were not
intended for any particular kind of country or related to any special situation or
ideology, but were universal and general. There were numerous references to
organizations in general. The organization of a government agency was repeatedly
compared to that of other operations. The management and organization of pri-
vate businesses was cited as a model with particular frequency. Government and its
various parts were thus compared to organizations that operate in a market.

Measuring the performance of units in the public sector was heavily emphasized,
and the standards referred to a number of instruments for this purpose—account-

ing systems, contracts, and evaluation.

Recommended methods of management, control, and organization downplayed
politics and ideology. For example, PUMA was careful to speak in terms of the
right kind of regulation, rather than deregulation, in an attempt to keep ideology
out of the discussion. Claims that problems, solutions, and techniques were unre-
lated to national differences reflected the view that questions of management and
efficiency in public administration were apolitical. References to the right kind of
regulation were also intended to emphasize that the standards were based on exper-
tise rather than ideology.

The recommendations were not very specific; in their wording they were quite
general and they were also referred to as such. Problems, solutions, and procedures
were bundled together in a package, as is particularly evident in the reform agenda
which summarized the report. The proposed procedures also indicated clearly that
a central unit in each country should be given the primary responsibility for ‘pub-
lic management’. In the view of the international organization, individual coun-
tries could best manage this area by establishing units responsible for monitoring
developments there and taking appropriate action. Perhaps the most fundamental
of the standards generated by PUMA was one that packaged reforms of the man-
agement, control, and organization of public operations into a policy area which
could be improved by the kind of reforms that were recommended in the PUMA

publications.

1

:
i
|

ri

or

i

pn +

- PD Ep nn
pam ~~ & == =


NDARDS
WORLD OF STÅ
106 A

|
While great emphasis was put on the need for a paradigm shift, the standard.
S or . om

form initiative |
hardly broke new ground, since they were based on re tiatives which

for basi
member countries reportedly had already taken. The mine vir Pl the reports
; n
on initiatives taken in the countries was that PU Intended tO produce

models that were useful in practice and directly relevant for the employees Most

actively involved. When PUMA was established, the reason given was the need

to share experience and make comparisons between countries; thereafter, it wa

continually stressed that the work should be practically oriented not overly
academic. The preparation of the reports in close ie, EE with national rep-
resentatives reflected this ambition to be practically oriented and to publish
reports that could be of direct practical relevance for officials in the member
countries. While the standards by no means had to embody established practice
in various countries, they did originate from what countries reported about their

own plans and initiatives. |
Another factor also tended to produce standards which were hardly novel, but

only reflected the problems perceived, the solutions proposed, and the ideals pre-
vailing in member countries: PUMA’s publications were customarily reviewed for
acceptability by the member countries prior to issuance.

The editing process

Reports on a number of reform initiatives were included in OECD’s publications.
Initiatives, discussions, and findings were presented, compared, and harmonized.
The resulting collection provided a relatively consistent picture of the public sec-
tor—what it is, what it does, and how it could improve. PUMA edited data, col-
lected from the countries in order to make it possible to compare, combine, and
formulate these in terms of general models to follow. In this way standards were

developed from the information that had been provided on organization, control.
and management in different countries.

Not only does such editing reduce the complexity and specifics of country
reports of reforms, but new meanings, new situations, and new ways of thinking
are applied to these reforms as they are edited into a set of standards. Thus, the
process of establishing standards involves more than just the reduction of com-
plexity, and the context, meaning, content, specificity, of reforms etc. New
meanings, contexts, specifications, and content may be added as well (cf. Westney
1987).

The manner in which this editing was done may help to explain why the stan-
dards were designed as they were. The editing process was shaped and restricted by
the context: how data were reported, how the setting was organized, and the con-

Such conventions are not explicitly formulated, but appear in the process and in
the publications as ‘rules that have been followed”. The term 'editing rule” is used

to emphasize this aspect of the editing Process (Sahlin-Andersson 1996).


ARENAS AS STANDARDIZERS 107

In the next section we show which editing
pUMA’s standardization process. The an
set of rules for context, one for logic, an

tules have guided and restricted

alysis covers three sets of editing rules: one

d one for formulation.
In the process of editing, unique and country-specifi

were disregarded. The models were disembedded from t

time-specific contexts. They were distanced and disconnected from time and space
and rendered generalizable (Giddens 1990; Czarniawska

| and Joerges 1996). In this
way the models appear to be available for others to imitate or adopt (Greenwood
et al. 1998; Rovik 1998).

C aspects of the reforms
heir country-specific and

may assume, however, that this decontexualization of models from country-spe-
cific features 1s done in several steps. It may start early,

| as countries write their
reports about their reforms. They may want to

shape their presentation in a way
that would make it interesting to others, disregarding those aspects of the reforms

that seem unique and too time or country specific, and emphasizing those that
seem to be general and generalizable. Compilations of data were focused on simi-

larities and areas considered relevant to most countries.

While the background and context of public management reforms differed
between countries and between reforms in individual countries (Hood 1995), they
were put into a common framework as they were collected and presented in the
same volume. They were generalized and assembled as a reform agenda or a policy
package, and a common logic and common explanations were ascribed to the
reforms. The reforms were justified as responses to a common set of problems fac-
ing all OECD countries. In this way the reforms were theorized. Strang and Meyer
(1993) have shown that such theorized models tend to diffuse easily.

Connections were suggested between the reforms and certain problems and sit-
uations that the countries faced. Thus, the theorizing and categorizing of the
reform models were accompanied by a parallel process of theorization and catego-
rization relative to the countries that had been reformed as well as potential
adopters of reforms: the situation, in both the countries that had been reformed and
those that were advised to reform, was described and explained in similar terms,
and in such a way the reforming countries were described as falling into the same
category. In accordance with Strang and Meyer (1993), we may expect that as the
reformers and potential reformers ‘are seen as falling into the same category, diffu-
sion should be rapid’. This editing of the logic of the reforms added a normative
element to the models: they were seen as not only possible to adopt, but also appro-
priate to adopt (Greenwood et al. 1998). |

As the context and logic of the models were edited, so were the formulations of
these models. The labelling of reforms reflected the editing of logic as well as con-
text. Ideological and structural differences between the OECD countries were
downplayed as reported reforms were edited into a set of public management stan-
dards. Models were labelled in such a way that they were justified in terms of
expertise rather than ideology. As mentioned, instead of talking and writing about
‘deregulation’ —which was seen as politically sensitive, at least potentially, in some


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

108

the Public Management Service talked about imprne:
age

smber state | å
me bregulatjon Higher quality Was to be achieved through regulatory refor in
ity of regt ation’ was used in this context. Presentations were tx MS ang

< 4 |

s Jabel ‘n ht regul Pur ua]
at pape may be termed principles (cf. K. Brunsson 1995) and refo ) im.
l c

ves, rather than data on implementation and effects. One reason for this
tives, more complex and difficult to measure and presen, US Wa

that the latter were
f the models was also a way to reformulate co]

The reformulation 0 a ee fants
| the international organization
o models to follow. In this way g not only ir

an arena where country representatives could meet and share their eXPerience
§ and

‘deas, but also could be much more active in disseminating ideals and ide
would teach countries what they should want to do, what they should It

(cf. Finnemore 1996). tM
In the next section we analyse the situation of PUMA, and show how ae
y

PUMA was developed into an active teacher and standardizer in public i
ge-

int

do, and why

The organization and situation of the standardizer

The design of PUMA—the standardizer—and of the standards it produced i ak
explainable by the conditions under which it operated. In this section we PE
how PUMA was formed and the requirements and interdependencies to which ;

was subject.

The establishment

PUMA was created in 1990 through the transformation of a pre-existing commit-
tee, TECO, which provided aid to European countries found in need of assistance
in modernizing their societies. The programme covered everything from the art of
growing potatoes to the administration of universities and the creation of social
insurance systems. Since TECO was involved in providing financial aid, it had one
of the largest budgets of any OECD committee. As the countries receiving aid
were modernized and became members of the EEC (which also meant gaining
access to another source of development assistance, the structural funds of the EEC
and later the EU), TECO’s continued operation was increasingly questioned. Its
costly assistance programme also came under fire as the OECD gradually KE
PE veker i TANTS oe activities were cut back, and issues
emphasis. In addition, it was saan stat å SJ TT
tries could benefit from the me aa bl

ge of management and control in the public

sector that was developing from co-operation in the OECD. The expression 'pub-

lic manage |
AN sement was used to summarize what this new activity of OECD was

While PUM | |
rase ze retained a few of TECO's assistance programmes, its mall
br byrd analyse, report, and evaluate information relating


—

—ÄÆ-v

ET

ARENA‘ T
S AS STANDARDIZERS 109

ro the development and reform of management and control of public agencies in
the OECD countnes. To smooth the way toward the best Jodsible bl pet
agement , PUMA was also supposed to facilitate dontacts årid the ent å of
experience, particularly among senior officials in the public sector. In sddition,

PUMA was to develop tools for achieving objecti ? |
on the progress of the OECD countries. JENS ASSEN

PUMA’s initial mandate was for five years; in 1995 that mandate was renewed
for another five-year period. In the beginning the secretariat was anxious to get rid
of its image as a source of financial assistance, and it launched into a process of trans-
formation from a financial aid organization to an arena for discussion. The idea was
to build up a special competence in ‘public management’ among the employees of
the general office.

There was widespread scepticism about transforming TECO into PUMA.
Representatives of some countries felt that the OECD, which was supposed to pro-
mote economic expansion and development, should concentrate on the private sec-
tor. One problem was that PUMA sought to organize its work in a different fashion
to the rest of the OECD. PUMA would not just measure and compare structural
models and results but would focus on processes; it would not rely too much on
external experts, but would be an arena where the civil servants of member coun-
tries could compare notes on the transformation and reform of the public sector.

In our participant observations we found the PUMA meetings to be surprisingly
informal for international gatherings; participants could present and discuss not
only reform initiatives but also their effects and the conclusions to be drawn from
the experience. The meetings thus had a much more reflective and critical tone
than the reports. The informality of the meetings was an explicit aim, repeatedly
emphasized by the chairman and the secretariat.

Gradually some of the sceptics became convinced that PUMA could probably
fulfil an important function in the OECD. The argument for involving the OECD
in matters of public administration was that efficient administration was critical to
the economic development of entire nations. Another influential factor was that
the USA, previously among the critics, had initiated its own comprehensive reform
of its public sector—an undertaking quite consistent with PUMA's activities. It
may also have mattered that TECO, which preceded PUMA, was such a large and
significant part of the OECD, and that some of TECO's financial aid programmes
were retained after that committee had been disbanded.

Thus, the reason given for co-operation was not that all countries should be
equal, harmonized, or adapted to each other, but that all countries needed to
exchange knowledge, ideas, ideals, and experience for the sake of their develop-
ment. The fact that PUMA in the form of TECO had previously existed and accu-
mulated valuable competence was used as a reason for continuing TECO's
operations, although the nature and focus of these operations had to be changed.
Thus, the formation of PUMA also illustrates how organizations may be radically
reformed but are difficult to terminate entirely. Some scepticism lingered on, how-

ever, even after PUMA had been formed.


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

110

ment, and support

gnanced by the OECD. The member countries of the ORC
PUMA was ¥ much attention to devote to each of its different å
i rev could simply count on receiving rom the OECD Member ¢
No committee + te deded tO conduct its operations. Funds were allocate 4 un.
tries the å on the basis of evaluations of the different OECD commine i
the — Elan There was competition on the global scene for th tes by
vf ae of OECD members. In order to ensure its financing and ¢

existence, PUMA needed recognition by the rest of the OECD and by t
ber souls It had to attract their attention and involvement and persy

Attracting interest, involve

C Interey
ntinueg

: ade them
to participate in studies and at meetings.

Most member countries were always represented at meetings. How
countries sent representatives of varying rank, who nt always acti
senting their own initiatives and sharing their expenience:i: While some
sent highly placed officials to the meetings, the eit sean of others
nominal, effected through their permanent representatives at the
Particularly since PUMA was supposed to encourage a candid interchange Of expe
rience, it was probably important for member-country representatives to supply the
information desired and to attend scheduled meetings. The degree to which Coun-
tries followed the standards offered by PUMA did not matter so much, an
in any case, be hard to measure. For a country wishing to inform others
reform initiatives, the greatest benefit would often be the favourable
gained from serving as an example of pioneering in reform. The Country
less interested in reports that critically examined the effects of its reforms, especially
since such reforms often fail to accomplish what their advocates have promised
(Brunsson and Olsen 1997). The countries that wanted to publicize their own

reform initiatives and experience also appeared to be the most active
the work of PUMA.

Another way to attract the interest and support of different countries was to

broaden the range of subjects discussed at the meetings. PUMA involved itself in a
number of issues. When we sat in on a meeting,

CVer, the
Ve in Drew
COuntrieg
Was Only

OECD.

d would,
about its
publicity

would be
participants in

is a variety of matters were brought
up by participants and by the secretariat (Lerdell and Sahlin-Andersson 1997). No

question was dismissed for lack of relevance to the subject at hand. Given

what
PUMA had to do to stay in existence,

gain credibility, and obtain financing, it had
ublic management’ or to be overly specific

contrary, its reviews of reports tended to be

very general, and the field of ‘public Management’ as well as PUMA itself became

something of a general store.

ARENAS AS STANDARDIZERS 111

groups of countries with similar administrative structures. In opposition to these

demands, it was argued that splitting up PUMA’s work in this way would be
wrong; what PUMA did should be useful for al] members, and all members could
benefit from better management and control in the public sector

While published reports usually emphasize similarities, and while they tend to

report SUCCESSES and models to follow, they do not provide much help for people
who want to learn about less successful initiatives or about unwanted effects of
reforms. One could claim, however, that in order to learn one needs to learn both
about what is working and about what is not working and why.

Country representatives who take part in the work of international organizations
develop contacts with representatives from’ other countries. As such relations
evolve, networks are formed. In such networks, country representatives can learn
more about the conditions, initiatives, and experience of other countries. Even
though the PUMA meetings were characterized by more reflective discussions on
the reforms reported, the fact that the group of delegates was so diverse seemed to
be a problem. Thus, published standards tended to be a major channel for the
results of PUMA's activities.

PUMA also sought to attract interest, involvement, and participants in its meet-
ings by developing closer ties to individual representatives of the respective coun-
tries. There is an integrative element in all co-operation. Among those who
co-operated in the work of PUMA, it was natural to expect that views and defin-
itions in the area of public management would gradually converge, particularly if
the group developed to become fairly stable over time. We may also expect these
individuals to support PUMA’s continued activity.

International organizations may also cultivate close and lasting contacts in each
country by encouraging the development of a similar official unit there. PUMA
advocated that special national units be established in order to analyse and reform
the management, control, and organization of the public sector; it also urged
clearer definition of the field of activity covering issues in this area. Users of future
standards could then emerge from the ongoing co-operation and exchange of

information in this sphere.

Standardization: A way for the neutral arena to produce results

PUMA's secretariat, designated as the Public Management Service, was, like the
rest of the OECD, located in Paris. The employees of the PUMA secretariat could
be divided into two groups: those in temporary positions, who were usually on

loan from the various member countries, and permanent employees. The tempo-

rary employees maintained close contact with their respective countries and actu-
national representatives. They served as channels

ally functioned to some extent as
of information between their respective countries and PUMA, and they were often

considered important by their own countries. The permanent

continuity and occupied the senior positions. Several of
government agency but had devoted their entire

assigned to projects
employees provided
them had never worked for a


112 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

es to careers with international organizations like the OECD They
ld society which has emerged largely since the
lve; in fact they have served as jt. inter

professional liv
were a part of the modern wot

Second World War and is continuing to evo

ve «Fi 1996).
mediaries (Meyer 1987; Finnemore | |
The modern world society is built on and characterized by certain rules. Norms.

and beliefs that are based on a Weberian rational tradition, and these Cultura] rules

of the world society thus have a major impact on what international Organizations
do, how they process information, and how they are evaluated and legitimized
(Meyer 1987; Meyer et al. 1987; Finnemore 1992, 1996). Even though PUMA wag
formed partly in reaction to what the rest of the OECD and other International
organizations were doing, the organization tended to face a situation similar to that
of many other international organizations—the work of BUMA was infused with
similar values, and the committee tended to be assessed by criteria similar to those
applied to other international organizations, particularly the rest of the OECD
Hence, PUMA was tending to become more like the rest of the OECD. In PUMA
a direct exchange of ideas on processes of reform was emphasized, but in order to
get continuous support PUMA also needed to show more solid results. Such results
took the form of the more or less formalized standards that were produced.

PUMA supporters emphasized that the committee—unlike its predecessor—vwas
not intended as an organization for distributing financial aid. PUMA developed and
offered standards rather than specific examples or advice for particular countries, Its
legitimacy was based on the correctness of the information that it provided, and on
its credibility in claiming to offer standards uninfluenced by self-interest or the
adoption of a role as advocate for a particular party (cf. Meyer 1994, 1996).

In light of these factors, it was clearly important for PUMA to show that its oper-
ations did not serve political ends but were aimed at determining what was truly
and objectively best. It follows that the standards formulated by PUMA should
preferably be general and universal, and be based on expertise rather than ideology
or political considerations. The justification for the existence of international meet-

ing places is precisely that they are considered neutral. PUMA could not appear to
serve the interests of some at the expense of others.

Standards created are not necessarily adopted

International organizations have sometimes had a major impact on how various
areas of activity have been defined and on how countries have organized central
units with responsibility for these areas. As Finnemore (1992, 1996) has shown,
between 1955 and 1985 a large number of countries developed a national research
policy and set up central bodies to be responsible for it. Finnemore differentiates
between demand- and supply-based explanations for this trend. By demand based
she means that special government units were created in response to a demand
within the country. She found few such examples in the case of national research

policy. Instead, countries were ‘taught’ by international bodies—the OECD and
UNESCO—that all modern countries urgently and unquestionably needed to have


ARENAS AS STANDARDIZERS 113

1 national research policy under the supervision of

national organizations became important designers and disseminators of categories,
meanings, Principles, and general recommendations for others to follow. In the
process of international co-operation, users of future stand

This was also the case with the standards that
dards were disseminated, people

which had been identified by

a central unit. These inter-

ards emerged.

PUMA produced. After the stan-

asked for new information and visited countries

) .
| PUMA as examples. In some countries the standards
inspired comprehensive reforms. Other countries were more reserved, and some

even made clear that they wanted no part of the standards. In Sweden issues of con-
trol, organization, and management of the public sector were increasingly discussed

as a distinct area of policy and reform. A public commission was appointed (SOU

1997: 57), and there were a number of reports in which problems and solutions
were discussed and presented as issues of ‘public management’.

However, the question of how standards are received is a complex one. One

might assume that a country which followed the PUMA standard by setting up a
special unit for management, control, and organization in the public sector would
also be receptive to other PUMA standards relating to public administration. But

this assumption does not necessarily hold true. Receptivity to different kinds of
standards may vary. There is no sure way of predicting the behaviour of a unit
designed according to a particular standard. Special units in charge of particular
areas in a member country not only enhance the country’s capacity to adopt stan-
dards and to initiate reforms. They also put the country in a better position to con-
sider carefully what it is doing. When an area attracts attention, it also becomes
exposed to discussion and criticism.

In this chapter we have described how standards were produced by an inter-
national organization that was intended to serve as an arena for the sharing of ideas
and experience. The form of standardization produced by the international arena
was partly a product of the editing process of gathering, collating, and disseminat-
ing information, and partly a product of the history, design, and situation of the
organization. PUMA helped to convey a uniform perception of the problems and
situation in the public sector, and to contribute to the spread of standards for its
continued development. This perception, and the standards which emerged, were
shaped in part by the presentations of the different countries, but also by PUMA’s
method of operation and the situation in which it found itself. To what extent will
standards developed in this way be adopted by particular countries? The question
is an empirical one and remains to be answered. To do so would require extensive
comparative studies to determine how standards are perceived and applied in dif-
ferent local environments.


3

Selling Standards
CT Co cee. dagih, *taveapleateiabbhiee. 4... ni

ROGER HENNING

Developing standards is one thing. Getting people to use — is another. The la.
ter is the subject of this chapter. We describe what stan "å 1Zers do to Persuade
people to adopt their standards, taking as our example «babe Ity standards,
Standards for quality management have become an international trend. The
most well known standards is probably ISO 9000, discussed in earlier chapters.
These standards were developed in the 1980s, the first version being published is
1987. Many consulting firms have presented their own models for quality devel.
opment, sometimes models of management by objectives. Total Quality System
and Commitment Quality Management are other standards established by consult.
ing firms. Quality awards have been established. The Malcolm Baldrige National
Quality Award was formed in the United States in 1987. The European Quality
Award was established in 1992 and many national awards have been Organized as

well.
We discuss three examples of standardizers and their standards, or rather ‘famj-

lies of standards’, in the field of quality. All the examples are taken from the
Swedish scene, which we do not expect to be very different from the situation in
other Western European countries. The standardizers are the Swedish Institute for
Quality and its Swedish Quality Award, the national standards organization
Standardization in Sweden and the ISO 9000 family of standards, and a consulting
firm with its model of management by objectives. The standards in question have
much in common. None of the standards tells us what constitutes quality in the
products or services offered. Instead, the standards are about methods for achieving
quality; they are intended to guarantee that production has been organized accord-
ing to a number of structural elements which reflect certain minimum require-
ments (Furusten and Tamm Hallström 1996).

These standardizers try to sell their standards to many, businesses as well as pub-
lic services. We analyse the arguments advanced to convince public services that

they should purchase and use the standards. But first we introduce the three stan-
dardizers and describe them in more detail.


SELLING STANDARDS 115

Standardizers and standards

The Swedish Institute for Quality

At a forum for co-operation between business and government in 1984, there was
1 discussion on the need for quality development in Swedish business. One indus-
trial organazation studied the matter and concluded that government action was
called for. Certain actors, including the blue collar labour unions, urged that the
discussion on quality be broadened to include the entire organization of Swedish
society. With both the public and private sectors in focus, a committee was formed

in 1986. This step was taken from the conviction that ‘the competitive power of

Sweden as a nation must be strengthened and the common welfare enhanced
through a continual process of change so that work and production, goods and ser-
vices satisfy the explicit or implicit desires and needs of customers’ (SIQ 19966).

In 1990 some twenty companies, state agencies, and other organizations joined
forces in founding the ‘Sponsoring Member Association’. The Association con-
cluded an agreement with the government on the formation of the Swedish
Institute for Quality (SIQ), which would continue the work of the committee.
SIQ was formally established by government decision in 1990 with the following
remit: to stimulate and contribute to the improvement of quality in all parts of
Swedish society; to co-ordinate initiatives and resource creation in the national
quality-development effort; and to promote effective participation by Sweden in
international co-operation in this area. The Institute was placed under the author-
ity of the government as represented by a state agency and the Sponsoring Member
Association, whose members include both public and private organizations, labour
unions, and business—major corporations as well as small businesses, industrial
companies as well as service enterprises. Today the Association has some one hun-
dred members; about thirty of them are public services (SIQ 1995).

SIQ has established the Swedish Quality Award, which is both a competition
and an instrument to improve quality. Participation in the competition entails pur-
chasing the standard, which is presented in an extensive manual of rules which sup-
posedly assure quality in an organization. According to the Institute, the manual
both can and should be used to improve quality in the operations of public bodies
as well as the private sector. Participants in the competition are given the task of
organizing their work in the area of quality so as to meet the standards of the
Award. There are standards for management and control as well as for business
information and analysis. Other standards cover methods of organizing work and
the development of goals, strategies, and plans. Still others concern employee
development, commitment, and participation. The standards specify how the
processes of business development and improvement should be designed.
Organizations which do not participate in the competition may still use the stan-

dard in its entirety. The competion rules have been published in a number of

brochures, many of them 'ntended for the public sector (SIQ 19964).


WORLD OF STANDARDS
116

Standardization In Sweden

(SIS) is the Swedish national standards organizer
had formulated its 9000 series, SIS dec; de ti

den. It formed a special company for this

pose, a company with several tasks. It tries to persuade the public of the adv
of quality standards, it actively markets the ISO 9000 standards, and jt sells
and educational programmes ON how to implement the standards.

As described in Chapter 5, the ISO 9000 ‘family of standards’ is a stry
quality system containing the elements of quality which allegedly should be presen,
in the production process of an organization. The concept of production proces
covers more than just industrial production. Over time it has been extende as
other kinds of processes and procedures, such as administrative routines and the
production of services. The procedures of the production process should be iden.
tified, documented, and subsequently reviewed at regular intervals.

The standard may be purchased for some 50 Euro. To implement an ISO 9009
standard, the adopter will usually hire a consultant to help in interpreting what this
extremely general standard means in the local context. After implementation, it ie

possible, though not necessary, to apply for certification—that is, for a formal cer-
tificate that the organization is in conformity with ISO 9000. Obtaining certifica-
tion means that the organization is examined and then receives a written attestation
by a certifying body that the requirements of the standard have been met. One of
eight approved Swedish certifying bodies is another SIS subsidiary. SIS thus has 2
dual role; it is involved both in designing standards, marketing and selling them to
customers, and in certifying that they are followed.

Standardization 1n Sweden

founded in 1922. When ISO
promulgate these standards in Swe

On,
help
Pur.
aNtageg
Advice

Ctured

Professional Management

Both SIQ and SIS are supposed to create opinion in favour of the need for stan-
dards; this mission is official in character even though the two organizations are
closely affiliated with units involved in ‘consulting’ on the standard. Professional
Management (PM) is engaged solely in commercial consulting activities.

PM is one of several Swedish consulting firms that offer models for control and
quality assurance systems based on management by objectives (MBO) to improve
quality in the public sector. While there may seem to be many MBO models, they
are very generally applicable and therefore quite similar. For instance, it is claimed
that the models can improve the quality of politically mandated operations for the
benefit of municipal inhabitants. One such standard is offered by this firm, which
is one of the more active and well known in the field.

The managing director of the firm has many years of experience in the munic-
pal sector, including service as director of child welfare. The firm’s concept of busi-
ness 1s to show how objectives, quality, quantity, and resources can be linked

together in a quality assurance system. The model for MBO which is offered by
PM teaches users how MBO works and how objectives should be formulated.


SELLING STANDARDS 117

There are instructions for measuring results and for de
the model is followed, there will be quality in Operations, as intended. The stan-
dard is marketed as 'objective-oriented quality assurance’. Here, too, we are deal-

ing with a family of standards based on the various elements of quality assurance,
and in this case, of MBO.

signing incentive systems. If

The problem of persuasion

It cannot be assumed that persuading the public sector to adopt the quality stan-
dards described here will be easy. The reasons are numerous.

First, the standards will depart considerably

7 from existing practice. While stan-
dards in general may

| represent various combinations of old and new, standards
relating to quality are almost invariably intended to provide new solutions. For

public services, the standards will to a large extent involve ideas, models, and con-

cepts which are completely novel, thus making the task of persuasion harder. To
date, the politicians responsible for the public sector have focused primarily on
defining what good quality is, rather than on methods for achieving it. They have
formulated their goals. For example, politicians have shown considerable interest
in the number of traffic fatalities, the rate of unemployment, the level of know-
ledge of school children, and other indicators that measure results. The general
processes by which the objectives are reached have also been of political interest.
But the more detailed administrative procedures of the kind treated in quality stan-
dards have seldom been of political interest. In other words, the typical politician

has focused on the actual quality of public products and services more than on the
procedures for achieving good quality.

To be sure, quality awareness and standards relating to actual quality are nothing
new in the public sector. Quality has normally been considered in the design of sys-
tems regulated by public law, such as the educational system, legislation, profes-
sional certification and authorization, supervisory boards of public agencies, and
especially the supervisory responsibilities of civil service departments. State agen-
cies with responsibilities in a particular sector have developed models for quality
assurance. In the area of health care there is a state agency with the specific task of
monitoring quality in actual services. As early as 1987 it published a report entitled
‘Quality Assurance. On measuring, evaluating, and developing the quality of med-
ical care’. The need for quality assurance in the Swedish public sector seems already
to have been addressed by the time the standardizers entered the field. In addition,
they seem to have a competitive disadvantage: unlike their competitors they have
no supervisory responsibility for public sector activities.

Another reason why we should not expect people in the public sector to be
particularly interested in the ISO 9000 or the Quality Award standards is that
these standards have clearly been developed for use in private manufacturing
industry, The language as well as the problems and solutions indicated in the stan-
dards are not easily immediately recognized as relevant for people in the public

sector,


—="v— Je  —/—==". == JJ PE oe pt i mg ED fr

A WORLD OF STANDARDS
118

e several reasons not CO expect much spontaneous deman
politicians OF managers IN the public sector v er ee standards devel
the three standardizers. If the standards are to Å ' på > O ve significant CXtenp
they will probably have to be marketed actively. Las not least: there jg vid.

variety of quality standards on the market, which 1S rpm — Competitive Even
public service providers which are basically interested in qua ra standards from brie
vate providers must still be persuaded to purchase a particular standard from any
given standardizer. For this reason standardizers devote a great deal of time ang

| | ee ‘On. 1 ing public opinio |
money into disseminating information, influencing p pinion, and m arketing

d from
Ped by

Thus, there ar

Arguments for standards

In this section we examine more closely the arguments advanced by these stan-
dardizers in favour of their standards. Since it cannot be taken for granted that
potential users will be interested, standardizers attempt to attract their interest ang
turn it into a demand for the standards—in other words, they seek to create 4 ‘mar-
ket’ for quality standards. Marketing and advertising are normally intended to build
confidence in one’s organization in general and in its products and services ip par-
ticular—with the further motive of persuading potential buyers that these 200ds
and services will benefit them. Arguments of this nature are used by the three stan-
dardizers under study. But the arguments can only be effective if there are people
who are prepared to listen. As we shall see, the three standardizers try to convince
public services that the standards are relevant for them.

Creating adopters: All are organizations and businesses

The standards discussed here are intended for organizations: in other words, highly
autonomous, hierarchical units with clear boundaries (Brunsson and Sahlin-An-
dersson forthcoming). Business enterprises are often described as such organiza-
tions. An important assumption in the sales arguments of the standardizers is.
therefore, that public services can and should be regarded as organizations or even
as businesses. While seldom stated explicitly as an argument, it serves as a basis for
other arguments, and is presented as an undisputed truth rather than as something
that could be discussed. The standardizers simply refer to public authorities, state
agencies, and county councils or municipalities, as organizations, thus assuming
without question that the standards are appropriate for their use. Another central
assumption is that these ‘organizations’ have customers. A corollary is that their
mission is to satisfy the needs of customers.

But what are organizations, businesses, and customers? The answer is not a fact
that can be objectively determined. It is far from obvious what sort of unit may be
considered an organization. Public services normally lack certain properties of å

complete organization—for example, they often have no clear boundaries and ar?
governed from outside rather than b

y their own management (Brunsson and
Sahlin-Andersson forthcoming),

For most public services the concept of custome!


SELLING STANDARDS 119

is problematic; to argue that they have
Customers exist where there

are the customers of a day-
lic sector, objectives are

‘ customers is controversial at the very least.
are m | |
: arkets and typically relate to business firms. Who
ar
€ centre, a school, ora state agency? Also, in the pub-

feed ea rarely clear, and there is seldom agreement on what they
mean. And objectives frequently conflict. Therefore. disagreement on what should

be considered good quality is easy. It is difficult to agree on ‘the needs of the cus-
tomer .

The administrative procedures of the public sector differ from those of private
enterprise. Administrative procedures for different kinds of cases handled by pub-
lic services are more extensively governed by laws and ordinances. Public services
are treated by the standardizers as autonomous decision makers who can ‘buy’ the
standard. But public services seldom have the authority to make such decisions on
their own. They are generally part of a larger legal entity, and adoption of a stan-
dard normally requires a decision on behalf of the entire entity. For example, it 1s
reasonable to expect that a standard must be approved by the local government or
the appropriate board before it can be used by a local roads department or a school.

The standardizers’ arguments ignore all of these special characteristics of public
services. The sales arguments for the Swedish Quality Award treat national defence,
universities, and state agencies as organizations and enterprises with customers; and
since they have customers, they should be involved in quality development. The
standard is said to be based on ‘principles of aggressive quality development, and
the purpose of the analysis is to stimulate constant improvement so that there will
be more satisfied customers’ (SIQ 1996a). The objective is to make every kind of
organization aware of the importance of quality issues: "Through improvement of
processes, quality is created’. The criteria and guidelines for the Swedish Quality
Award are said to be ‘tools of improvement for all organizations in Sweden’ (SIQ
1996a). It is assumed that there are profit centres in the public sector which have
an independent responsibility for their customers.

SIQ presents some appropriate examples from the private sector. A number of
companies have established their own quality awards which are totally or partly
based on the Swedish Quality Award. Among them are major enterprises like
Telia, Ericsson, ABB, and Volvo. But the examples are equally applicable to pub-
lic ‘organizations’. The Institute notes that the use of the Swedish Quality Award
as a tool is common in public bodies, including national defence, the national
labour market administration, regional social insurance oftices, schools, the system
of higher education, and Statistics Sweden. Public bodies are supposed to adopt the
general principles for the quality standard (SIQ 1995, 1996a, 1996b, 1996c. See also
SIQ 1996-7).

SIS also treats public bodies as if they were businesses. It presents good examples
from the public sector: nursing homes and homes for the elderly, and even public
authorities, are considered organizations which have customers, and which should use
the standard (SIS ForumCenter 1996). ‘All businesses will benefit by using ISO 9000,

including for example, manufacturers, service businesses, municipalities, county

councils, government agencies, exporters as well as importers, and sole proprietor-


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

120
ations’, claims SIS, which regards the standard 4

We or JE kin
as aad sad palvat sectors: ‘The principles of ISO 9000 ate mh
ren the concept of the customer may be used in the public iy

ration is exposed to competition is not a decisive factor Maly,

C | |

d satisfying customer wants are desirable in ql] Operation,
.

ships as well
suited for the pu
applicable’ (ibid.),
tor. ‘Whether an op
good use of resources an
(SIS KvalitetsForum 1995, p. 3).

The standard is no less relevant if the Operation ;
Is

ic Or anization.
vices by a public org as long as there are customers (SIS KvalitetsFory

entirely within the public sector,

- SIS Forum AB 1994-7). |
icing of Professional Management (PM) also stress the potential 156 of

the standard in both the private and the public se en they also place
public services in the same category as rt pk aa — What js
required for inclusion in this category. At the same time, they make an effort to
show how extensively the standard 1s used by public sori PM states that nearly
seventy municipalities and over thirty state agencies are among 1ts Customers for the
standard. Day-care centres, nursing homes, police, regional social insurance offices,
and local tax offices are presented as organizations with customers of their own,

The standardizers emphasize the similarities rather than the differences between
businesses and public services; there will thus be more adopters of the standards—
something the standardizers want. The standards are SO general in nature that they
may be used by all organizations and even by bodies with only limited resemblance
to organizations. For example, they may be used by all of Sweden’s 289 munici-
palities and by the national labour market administration as well as in schools, ‘The
importance of learning from others cannot be sufficiently emphasized! In the area
of medical care, we have a lot to gain from looking at the experience of business.
The similarities in methods of management and control, development, and im-
provement are greater than the differences.’ These are the words of a physician
quoted in one of the publications (SIQ 19966).

Small organizations will benefit just as much as large ones from using ISO 9000
as a standard, claims SIS. Since quality development pays, it is an equally obvious
investment for all operations regardless of their size and nature. With the logical
structure of the standards, any and all can use them, we are told. The conceptual
framework of the standard is generally applicable and thus relevant to service busi-
nesses as well as in public administration and in other organizations.

Only PM, which almost exclusively serves public-sector clients, emphasizes the
special nature of public services. But here, too, we find that the service is supposed
to be an organization with customers where the quality standard is applicable: ‘The
operation 1s there for the customer’. The object of quality development 1s said to
be satisfied customers, It is also said that engaging in quality development will resu"
in continued enhancement of employee competence and commitment All
employees are involved. It should be noted that the firm addresses the concept of

the customer, raising the question of who the customers of a public organiza


SELLING STANDARDS 121

are. In the case of a day-care centre, for example, are

ents, the people of the community, the staff. or some
no clear definition of the concept of customer. At t

emphasizes that a public organization has (political)
than those of a private business.

The forceful assertion that the public sector has customers, despite all indications
to the contrary, Is rather surprising. If there are customers dun ‘the market’ should
be able to control quality, and there would be less need re quality standards to ful-
fil this function. Paradoxically, in this situation as defined by the standardizers, we
should expect the need for quality standards to be the least. In fact, it can as salle be
claimed that the public sector needs quality systems, on the very pata? that there
are no specific Customers or markets that might object clearly and vigorously to poor
quality. Why then do the standardizers not argue along these lines? One reason may
be that the standards that they offer were originally developed for business, and that

the basic underlying assumptions were valid in a business context. The concept of
the customer is then used simply because customers are essential for a business.

they the children, the par-
other group? Thus, PM has
he same time, the firm also
objectives of a different nature

For the benefit of adopters and their customers

A classic argument for standards is that they are beneficial for those who adopt
them. It is expected that standards will be followed by the people with an interest
in doing so. Standardizers want people to conclude that the standard is good for
them. But it adds to the attractiveness of standards if they can be shown to have
good effects on others as well. In the cases described here, the standardizers argued
that their standards were good both for the public services that were supposed to
adopt them and for their ‘customers’.

‘The Swedish Quality Award emphasizes how a business operates—in other
words, how we produce goods and services. We can only change what we are
doing when we have become aware of how we are doing it. In this view of qual-
ity the focus is on the customer’ (SIQ 19960). Users of services provided by the
public sector are considered customers, but taxpayers are not. The standardizers do
not justify their standard on the ground that it benefits the citizenry as a whole.

It is claimed that the standards are in the interest of the adopters, on the ground
that ‘organizations’ that follow the standards will be successful—because successful

companies use the Swedish Quality Award standard. ‘Quality is the distinguishing
feature of a successful organization’ (SIQ 1996b). The way to make the organiza-
tion a good one is to use the standard, it is held (SIQ 1996-7).

It is said that ISO 9000 is necessary for the organization. By making unceasing
efforts at improvement, SIS maintains, the organization will be able to meet new
demands and objectives. ISO 9000 1s not supposed to put operations into a steady
state. On the contrary: working on quality with ISO 9000 as a model is about
‘visions, belief in the future, improvement, decisiveness, security, commitment,
and continuing development ‘(SIS KvalitetsForum 1995). As SIS argues in its

brochure, called ‘Make the company stronger :


A WORLD OF STANDARDS
ed to result in satisfied customers, efficient compan
g enhancement of employee competence and commitment

mepires the confidence of the market. All employees must be comm
pment inspire: d opportunities for improvement, so that quality devel
ly what makes quality development so exciting.

y Opera.

Quality development I intend

tions, and continuin

develo ne
quality. There are unlimite
never ceases. T hat 1s precise

SIS sees the existence of virtually | | 5 Of the

organization and those of the customer: jp eid en” tt lan
continually increasing the value of the good or Omer. Satisfe,

customers are the companies’ most important asset. The long-term TUst of cys.
tomers is the foundation of profitability. EEC, MISE OPNE Control of the
business leads to success and lasting profitability (SIS KvalitetsForum 1995)
Quality work based on ISO 9000 1s said to fulfil an important function of th
nature. ‘Quality pays off, SIS repeatedly asserts (SIS ForumCenter 1996, p. 6).
PM, on the other hand, views the interests of the organization somewhat differ.
ently. For instance, the objectives set by the political leadership serve as the point
of departure in PM’s world. PM cites the following as the distinguishing features
of its standard: its wide range of applicability, its simplicity, and the link between
resources and the objectives of the activity as set by the political leadership. The
point is thus to accomplish politically defined objectives. The standard is supposed

to heighten awareness of these objectives and facilitate the discussion surrounding
them, and also to promote the use of methods for evaluating the quality systems of
the organization.

Another line of argument frequently encountered 1s that the standard encourages
economizing and improvements in efficiency. The standardizers seek to persuade
the potential adopter that their standards will lead to efficiency in the production
of public services, as well as to ‘profitability’. The purpose of the standards is to
ensure that the quality aspects of production are considered, but using the standard
will also make the production more efficient—or profitable (SIQ 1996-7: SIQ
1995, 1996b, 1996c; SIS Forum AB 1994-7; SIS ForumCenter 1996; SIS Kvali-
tetsForum 1995).

Å business that wins the Swedish Quality Award can be assured of more satisfied
customers, and thus a more effective operation, SIQ maintains (SIQ 19966, 19963.
Direct or indirect reference is made to the need for public sector activities to cut

costs and improve efficiency. "The important thing is to get the most for the money
we spend on the operation. We are told this so that we will economize intelli-
gently’ (Svensson 1993: Svensson and Pihlgren 1989). PM's standard is said to be
based on the CQM concept (Commitment Quality Management); the basic phi-
losophy of CQM is to permit ‘flexible adaptation to complex organizational envi-
ronments with multidimensional commitments’. It is claimed that the model is well

conceived and that using it will result in solidly supported programmes for contin-
ually improving efficiency.

18


= _—"— ae lt

SELLING ST
FANDARDS 123

References to others

The third line of the standardizers’ arguments is to show that there is support
elsewhere for themselves and their standards The idea is to sets dar ai
standards were developed, influenced, or accepted by other signifi | |
regarded actors, adding that the standardizers resemble these adtors
ilar activities, Or are in contact with them. A variation is to |
using the standards would be in distinguished company.

The first argument in this category is that the standards have been accepted in
other countries. The standards marketed by SIS and SIQ are presented as
internationally recognized. PM states in its brochures that it is working with the

UN General Assembly on issues relating to quality. It adds that most of its activi-
ties are conducted outside Sweden.

SIQ claims that it belongs to an international association for quality development
and that the Swedish Quality Award is part of an international trend: there are sim-
ilar quality awards and incentives for improvement in other parts of the world. SIQ
collaborates in various ways with the organizers of these quality awards, who share
their experience and ideas. In Japan the Deming Prize has been in existence for
more than forty years, SIQ points out. The Malcolm Baldrige National Quality
Award has meant, and still means, a great deal to the development of American
business, the institute claims. The Swedish Quality Award is based on the American
counterpart (SIQ 1996a).

The international character of the ISO standard is also emphasized. According to
SIS, ISO consists of a number of internationally agreed principles and requirements
for managing a business so that it earns the confidence of customers and markets.
It emphasizes the truly international nature of ISO 9000. While ISO 9000 is a
European standard, it has also been accepted throughout the industrialized world,
in countries including the United States, Japan, and Australia. ‘The ISO 9000 fa-
mily is a global one with several generations’, states SIS (SIS KvalitetsForum 1995,
p. 8).

Secondly, the standardizers point to their connection with academic research.
They aim to encourage research. SIQ is charged with ‘helping worthy projects at
the start’ (SIQ 1996c). The institute notes that its staff participate in reference and
work groups of R&D projects on quality. SIS also stresses its ties with the academic
world. MBO models are said to have been conceived and designed by academic
researchers. The model used by PM has been described in a number of books
which may most accurately be classified as textbooks (Svensson 1993; Pihlgren and
Svensson 1989).

Thirdly, those who accept the standard are sometimes offered an opportunity to
meet prominent people. Activities in the field of quality are enlivened with numer-
ous contests, prizes, award ceremonies, and conferences. In December each year an
impressive ceremony is held in Gothenburg, Sweden: ‘Some 100 personally invited

guests from Swedish business and government participate in the ceremony’ (SIQ
19960. Any organization ‘may be the one which the committee of judges selects

cant and highly
engage in sim-

show that any party


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

124
ale voce he symbol of the Swed;
vutstanding example and which wre the sy Wedish Quality
Award from His Majesty the King å - ial conference, Quality i |
as one of the founders of the bienni: n Municipq).
SIQ was ‘es’, Here, too, there is an element of comp
Ce

best articles in the field of quality, and the authors receive

ion: a jury selects t | | |
tit jury ferring the prizes has been the Swedish prime mi

cash awards. One of those con

ter (Kvalitet och Förnyelse sal ce a ske
Fourthly, official authority 1s involved, albeit in a w Unexpected Way,

Although SIS and SIQ might have emphasized the role of the government 28 co.
Gnancier or co-founder, they have not done so. Instead they stress their legal
status as private organizations, following the example of business in genera] and

industrial companies 1n particular.

Nevertheless, the standardizers va | 18
dards. They have had some success IN persuading public commissions and state

agencies to recommend the incorporation of the standards in. legislation. The
Swedish Health and Medical Care Act mandates quality systems, thus opening up
> new market for standardizers. Moreover a provision has been added to the Social
Services Act requiring quality assurance systems in every work unit: this means that
every profit or cost centre must then use a standard. The standardizers also make
references to approval by labour unions. It should be noted that the latest collec.
tive bargaining agreement for teachers contains a section on development work ip
schools. The section provides for the use of a model along the lines of SIQ's basic

Nis.

lue some kind of official backing for their Stan-

standard.

Arguments that are missing

Several of the ‘traditional’ arguments in favour of product standardization are not
found in the three cases studied. Normally one of the main arguments for standards
is that they facilitate communication and exchanges of some kind. In its general
promotional material, SIS argues that ISO 9000 makes it possible to speak the same
language in international communication and trade, since the principles and
requirements are the same the world over. ISO 9000 is described as the global stan-
dard that promotes understanding across national boundaries (SIS KvalitetsForum
1995). These arguments are not used in marketing to the public sector, for obvi-
ous reasons; schools and day-care centres do not have the same need as businesses
for local, regional, nation-wide, or international communication with other orga-
nizations of their own kind.

Nor are the traditional arguments in favour of uniformity applicable, now that
public services seem more interested in adapting to local conditions or in making a
point of their own uniqueness. And in the public sector the argument that stan-
dardized organizations are more competitive cannot be used, either; here units ate
expected not to compete but to promote the common good. Thus the standardiz-

ers seem to be observing some differences between private industry and the public
sector after all.


PART ITI

Adopting Standards


9

Following Standards

Nits BRUNSSON AND BENGT JACOBSSON

In Part II we have used some empirical

ne | examples in order to discuss how standards
in the field of administration are create

| d and how their content is determined. In
all the examples given, the standards were produced at considerable distance from

those who were supposed to follow them in practice. Also, the stand

| ards reflected
ideals and popular ideas rather th

an any actual practice. They were derived from an
imagined general case rather from than 4 specific one. Standardizers tried to con-

vince others to follow their standards by arguing that the follower's specific case

was in fact an example of an appropriate general one. But given the role of the stan-
dardizers and the character of their standards it is far from clear why people inter-
ested in their specific situation should follow standards at all.

The four chapters in this final part of the book deal with these potential follow-
ers of standards. In this chapter we discuss what it means to follow a standard and
why individual actors do so. The next two chapters concern the ways in which
adopters react collectively to standards: there we examine why a number of poten-
tial adopters choose to follow the same standard, thus establishing various degrees
of uniformity among themselves. In the final chapter we discuss positive and neg-
ative effects of standardization and following standards for followers and others.

Following standards by changing practice or presentation

A typical standard consists of a statement about the generally desired qualities of a
product, an activity, or a document, for example. The standardizer seeks to regu-
late the design of these objects or processes. Following a standard means establish-
ing some-degree of consistency between the standard and what one does: Such a
consistency can be created in two ways: either by changing practice to fit the stan-
dard, or by changing the presentation of practice in accordance with the standard.

Practising standards

When practice is changed, we may say that the standard is implemented Or prac-
tised. The follower performs a translation. The translation involves two aspects,
from talk to action—what the standard says is translated into what the follower
does—and from the general to the specific—the general requirement of the


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

128

1e follower's own specific practice. When this transla.

standard is translated into tl 9
is practising the standard.

tion has taken place, the adopter I | ul vil
For example, there are standards which recommend that sc ools conduct sel¢.

evaluations. Implementing or practising this kind of standard means that schools
change their practice to make it more consistent with the standard. They initiate
various evaluation projects: they let pupils say what they think about the teaching:

they ask parents to fill out questionnaires about the work of the school, etc.
Often, however, this 1s not enough. There are parties besides the standardizers

that are interested in whether the standard is followed or not, and their judgement
may be important to the follower. So the follower finds it important not Only to

practise a standard but also to tell others that it does so. Such reporting is sometimes
even required by other parties, such as certifiers of compliance with the standard
The school in our example is likely to present its new projects, citing them as
examples of evaluation to parties such as politicians, parents, and audit offices.
Such presentations are also the result of a translation, but in the Opposite direc-
tion to that involved in practising standards. Instead of just translating the Standard
into practice, the school also describes its new practice in terms of the standard,
One could say that this new practice is standardized. It involves the translation from
action to talk, from the specific to the general, from own activity to categories that

can be understood by others.

Standardizing practice

Alternatively, following a standard may involve translation in the latter direction
only—from specific action to general talk; the follower of a standard changes its
presentation of its practice, but it does not change the practice. Existing practice js
continued but now described in accordance with the standard. In other words the
follower standardizes its practice but does not practise the standard. This strategy js
likely when the adopter believes that its practice complies reasonably well with th
standard—and there is reason to assume that this belief is shared by relevant others
Standardizing existing practice is also a way of following standards: in the expos

case, standards for nomenclature, it fulfils the very purpose of the ila
For example, instead of implementing an evaluation standard, a school might
maintain that it has always conducted evaluations by giving pupils examinations. If
the school’s claim is credible, it will not have to change its OED it can still be
considered to follow modern standards that call for evaluations. To dar compli-
rn with the standard, it may also be necessary to relabel what is already being
PE ir instead of something else. In other situ-
ations individuals may have to call taking a walk exercise if they want to convince
oe and others that they follow certain health standards; organizations may
ia . i AN ne the re — of quality improvement if they
relation to administration woull b (hearer an Go : i po et
e termed administrative policy if there were å


FOLLOWING STANDARDS 129
«tandard that such a policy should exist. In all these cases, there would be no change
in existing practice, Just a change in the way it was presented

Sometimes, though, standardizing practice may require more than ren

The adopter may have to demonstrate that its current practices
sions, administrative policy etc.

aming it.
are really evalua-

| What is done must then be described more pre-
cisely. And sometimes the current practice cannot possibly be described in a

credible way as consistent with the standard. The follower has then to change, not
only presentation but also practice. The school would have to evaluate not only the

pupils, but the teachers as well; the individual would have to walk faster and fur-

ther; the organization would have to establish a special unit for quality develop-
ment and the government one for administrative policy,

_ | for example. In these cases
standardizing practice requires practising the standard.

Ambiguity and de-coupling

Exactly how existing practice should be changed by the standard need not be very
clear. There are often several possible interpretations of standards and also of prac-
tice (Czarniawska and Joerges 1996). As described in Chapter 5 there are a num-
ber of ways to provide additional value for the customer under the ISO 9000
standard, and more than one method of operation can be considered to meet this
standard. In addition it is generally difficult to do exactly what a standard says. The
standard is general and abstract, whereas operations are always specific. Practising a

standard is mostly about adapting practice so that the standard describes it with rea-
sonable accuracy.

Since it is often unclear what kind of practice may be presented as conforming
to a standard, the adopters may have considerable freedom to decide whether or
not to change existing practice at all or how much to change it. They can use the
standard as an argument for changing their practice, or they can argue that their
practice is already in accordance with the standard. In either case they have to con-
vince others that their interpretations are sensible. When adopters think that chang-
ing practice would involve sacrifices, they may find it useful to adopt a step-by-step
approach to the translation process: first testing whether existing practice can be
translated into the standard, and then—only if the translation is not credible
enough—taking the trouble to change existing practice. Whatever strategy is
chosen, the adopter of the standard will be open to criticism by others who have a
different opinion on whether existing practice conforms to the standard. If practice
is changed, there may be criticism for attempting to introduce a rehash of old,

already well-established principles. If current practice 1s not changed, there may be

criticism for presenting it in a misleading, unduly positive light. 19 Tee

The scope for criticism is also affected by the extent to which practice is of inter-
est to and observable by others than those who decide on adoption, and what
authority or power these others possess. In organizations, members often have good
insights into and strong interest 1n practice; they may not accept any interpretation
of standards from their leaders. People outside the organization may have a strong


A WORLD OF STANDARDS

130

ht. The purpose of various forms of certification and aud;
it. |

+ reliable basis for determining whether 4 pa

interest but less insig |
tic.

is to provide such outsiders with

+. tandard.
eS a particular s
ation conforms to bed pn nds on the na
etation and criticism also depend: ture Of the stan.

to maintain that narrow-gauge railway track (891 mm)

can meet the standard for normal gauge (1 435 mm.). fo contr ° that standard.
a railway line using narrow-gauge track will aria ve 5 P rae On the
other hand, the same railway line may claim to fo Sane EEG: y OMective
(MBO) without having to change its practice at pa ince meee Oo Practices,
from generally having one's objectives in mind to the preparation of specific state.

ments of objectives, may pass as MBO, many can hold that they are already fo).

lowing this standard. de
Extensive research on individuals and organizations has shown that there may be

substantial differences between presentation and practice, between formal struc-
tures and actual operations, and between what people say and what they do (Kaplan
1964: Weick 1976; Meyer and Rowan 1977; Argyris and Schén 1978; Brunsson
1989; Jacobsson 1989; K. Brunsson 1995). Actors have dual systems which are de-

coupled from each other; they may argue that they tollow a standard while not
doing so in practice. This is a phenomenon which standardizers seldom appear to

notice, or at least seldom discuss seriously in public. Standardizers seem to assume

that standards that change presentation always change practice.
For example, as argued in Chapter 5, standardizers in the field of administration

seem to have overlooked much of the research on organizations of the last thirty
years. They seem to assume that the introduction of administrative standards wil]
have a major impact on the operations of organizations, and on the results achieved.
If potential adopters of these standards were to share that view, they would think
twice before putting the standards into practice. If å standard has a substantial impact,
the consequences will be more severe if the standard proves inappropriate. One rea-
son why administrative standards are followed so extensively is probably that the
adopters do not really expect the effects to be as dramatic as the standardizers claim.
Even if the standard thereby loses some of the appeal that it possessed in the rhetoric
of the standardizers, it may be easier to follow, since it will involve less risk and arouse
less resistance. For instance, certification of conformity with ISO 9000 is focused
more on documentation than on the operations documented (Walgenbach 1997).
The standard is then rather innocuous: if one fears that its implementation is not a
good idea, one does not need to let it affect actual operations.

Thus standards may be followed in different ways: by practising standards, by
standardizing practice, or by doing both. But why do actors follow standards at all?
This question is the subject of the next section.

ular oper
The scope for interpr
dard. It is of course futile

Why follow standards?


FOLLOWING STANDARDS 131
are able to decide for themselves whether to act according to a standard

dentified two kinds of actors: individuals and organizations aie “ . sd We
only capable of following standards in areas where it truly | is ca re
words, Where it can make choices and take action. An rem ane
capacity to act in all areas; for example, a small company may not ved på iit -
ro follow certain administrative standards which require expensive kanel

procedures and a large administrative staff. And in some areas it may make no dif-

ference what the actor wants, since there is little or no room for choice: for exam-

ple, individuals who have - Obey certain laws and organizational directives will
have no use for standards which tell them to do otherwise

When able to act and choose, actors’ propensity to follow a particular standard
will depend on their identity—that is, who they are—and on their situation. Like
other rules, standards are intended only for certain kinds of actors and situations. In
order to judge whether a standard is relevant one must know and be able to clas-
sify oneself and one’s own situation. One must be able to answer the three ques-
tions we mentioned in Chapter 1: Who am I? What is my situation? What is
appropriate for an actor like me in a situation like this one?

Identity

Standards are always addressed to general categories, not to individual adopters. In
other words, they are directed at potential adopters who have defined their iden-
tity in terms that basically fit the general category indicated by the standard.
Anyone who considers himself unique, and thus not belonging to any general cat-
egory, will find that no standards apply to him. By following standards actors tend
to become more like others, but they will not be receptive to standards unless they
have seen some similarity between themselves and others in the first place. In other
words, standardizers may create some similarity, but they are also dependent on
much pre-existing similarity if they are to spread their standards to many (Strang

and Meyer 1993).
The identity of an actor is not always clear and immutable. As we discussed in

the previous chapter, for example, it 1s not certain what should be considered an
organization. A school, a public administration unit or a municipality 1s sometimes
regarded as such; at other times each is treated as an organization. The latter view
appears to have become more common in recent years. Whichever definition pre-
vails will determine which standards the unit will be receptive to: ‘schools’ are
more likely to adopt standards for schools than for organizations and vice versa.
And certain definitions, such as that of a public administration unit, a subsidiary, a
pupil, or a subordinate, imply that the unit is not a full-fledged actor; 1t may even
lack the authority to decide whether to follow standards. |
Standardizers need not passively accept å given identity fora potential adopter.
Sometimes they will try to influence an actor's perception of its own eg;
attempting to convince it that it 1s a full-fledged actor capable of adopting standar E
and that it belongs to a group for which certain standards are relevant. As we note

i

a


132

dardizers seeking to sell standards to organizations tried to
were in charge of organizations rather than public fae.

dardizers offering standards for service enterprises argue

| | ‘nto this category (Furusten 1999)
nesses and public units fall into | |
ens men are ee unavoidable if the potential adopter would like to
ertain |

intain a particular identity. There are standards which constitute a certain kin d
main

Factor: if one does not follow certain standards people may doubt that one js really
of actor;

a particular kind of actor. Any individual who wants to be perceived as a ventle.

man should behave according to the standards for gentlemen provided by etiquette
books. Any organization rejecting all the basic administrative standards of the

‘POSDCORB’ type (referred to In Chapter 5) would risk casting doubt mt
whether it really was an organization, or at least on whether it was a good one. In
order to be viewed as a responsible member of the international community

nation-state has at least to take a position on standards created by UN bodies for

labour market and educational policies. |
Some standards aim to maintain or accentuate the essential characteristics of the

actor. As described in Chapter 1, an actor is an entity possessing independence and
sovereignty, autonomous Or self-interested goals, rational means and qualities,
independent resources, and clear boundaries (Meyer et al. 1987). Put differently, an
actor is an entity with a clear specific identity, a strong hierarchy (i.e., a system of
strong internal control from the top—be it a leader's control of organizational
actions or the soul’s control over the body), and a high degree of rationality
(Brunsson 1996). Many standards consist of prescriptions of how to reinforce iden-
tity, hierarchy, and rationality. Many organizational standards deal with how an
organization can reinforce its identity by pinpointing its special tasks or defining its
business mission, how it can strengthen hierarchy by achieving better internal lead-
ership and control, how it can become more rational by planning more, and the
like. Individuals are given general advice on, for example, how they can establish
their identity by ‘finding themselves’, how they can gain greater control over their
lives and stop smoking or go on a diet, and how they can become more goal
directed and plan ahead. It is difficult for organizations or individuals who think of
themselves as actors to reject such standards.

| Not only does the identity of a potential adopter affect which standards it will
follow. Following standards may also be a way actively to define one’s own iden-
tity, to show that one is a particular kind of actor (or, for the standards just
described, that one is an actor at all). For example, one way for a government to
demonstrate that it actually is governing a nation-state is to follow established stan-
dards for nation-states. A new nation-state uncertain of its position—one needing
to prove that it is a genuine, modern, good state—is likely to be more receptive to
such standards than well-established nation-states like the UK or the USA (Meyer
1997). Likewise a public service which has been given the status of a company may
have a particular need to show that it really is a business; consequently, it may be
much more eager than well-established companies to follow standards for bus-
nesses. Contrary to what is assumed in traditional diffusion models (Smith et al

in the last chapter, stan
convince leaders that they

vices, for example. And stan


FOLLOWING STANDARDS 133

1927), this mechanism makes the periphery more likely to adopt standards than the

centre.

Following certain standards and other rules may even be the principal method of

acquiring a certain identity. If an individual wants to gain an MBA degree, he or

she should of course enrol in a programme which meets the standards for this type

of education. If an organization wants to become or remain a member of a stan-

dard-based organization, that organization should follow its standards (Chapter 4).
One way for a country to improve its chances of admission to the European Union

(EU) is to start observing standards and other rules adopted by the EU or generally
followed by EU members.

Situation

Standards are intended not only for a certain kind of actor but also fora certain kind
of situation. Normally the situation is specified directly or indirectly in the stan-
dard. Standards for telephones are relevant to the manufacturer of telephones.
Standards for quality assurance, decentralization, and evaluation are intended for
situations characterized by poor quality, centralization, and limited knowledge of
what has happened.

But like the identity of potential adopters, the nature of the situation is not
always evident. This fact is often exploited by standardizers for promoting their
standards. One way for standardizers to gain acceptance for their standards is to
convince the potential adopter that its situation is relevant. Those who market stan-
dards for solving economic problems will refer to an impending economic crisis;
those who offer standards to make a business more competitive will warn that com-
petition 1s likely to increase in the future. Thus, standardizers talk not only about
solutions, but also about problems. When standardizers succeed with such efforts,
certain problems become fashionable; in other words, many become convinced
that they are suffering from these particular problems. Standards which promise
solutions to the same problems will then become popular and are likely to be
adopted.

Following certain standards may also be a way for the adopter to demonstrate
that it is confronting a particular situation. For instance, governments and corpo-
rate executives may choose to follow standards for dealing with financial problems
in an effort to create or increase citizen or employee awareness of the need for

economizing.

Standardization and being an actor

Even though standards are addressed to actors, there is a fundamental contradiction
between standardization and being an actor. An actor is an independent individual
or organization that is willing and able to make its own choices and to make these

choices in a rational way, and a unit that possesses qualities which are special and
an actor will not readily follow rules seen as

sometimes unique. Consequently,


å WORLD OF STANDARDS
134
arly not directives, which leave the actor no choles
e more appropriate than directives as 4 form v
at suspicious of standards. Conforming .

created by outsiders, particul

For actors, therefore, standards ar
e somewh

advice of others, relinquishing a certain degree of
control to others, and often becoming More sim

€ which is very consistent with the concept of

rules. Even so, actors may b
standards means following the
one’s freedom of choice and self-
ilar to many others as well—none 0

an actor. |
ain reluctance to follow standards—in Particular

t
We may therefore expect a cer =
those that are well known and followed by many—from individuals and Organiza.

tions seeking to be highly autonomous, innovative, and different. Possibly they will
submit to standards in areas of marginal importance, for example, a company spies
ing to offer unique products or services may be fairly receptive to administrative

standards which apply only to internal operations. It 1s also easier to follow highly

general standards than those specifying exactly what to do.
A special role is played by the standards that aim to reinforce the essential aspects

of being an actor, which were described above. Their contents are clearly attrac.
tive to those who want to maintain or strengthen their actorhood. At the same time
they present a paradox to those who want to be strong actors, since such actors
ought not to follow standards, but instead find their own unique solutions

(Brunsson 1996).

How voluntary is the standard?

In principle, following a standard is voluntary. The standardizer is not able or wil]-
ing to force his standard upon others. And even though the identity and situation
of an actor may make it appropriate to follow a particular standard, it is not Certain
that the actor will do so. An actor will require more incentives to adopt a standard.
A third party besides the standardizer and the potential adopter may provide such
incentives. A third party may want the actor to follow certain standards, or inter- |
action and communication with this third party may be greatly facilitated by fol-
lowing certain standards. If actors are highly dependent on their relations with such
third parties, the relevant standards become practically coercive.

For example, customers may want to buy only those products that comply with
certain standards or from producers that follow certain quality or environmental
standards. It may be hard to find another football team to play with if one does not
follow the standard rules for football. It may be difficult to communicate that one's
vessels are indeed safe if they are not properly registered and classified by Lloyd's
or a similar body. In all these examples the degree of voluntariness is in practice
very low: the actor will have no choice but to follow certain standards.

Å particular standard may also be coercive in practice because others than the
potential adopter generally believe it to be reasonable and that it is important to fol-
low it. In other words, the third party may be public opinion in general or the
opinion of groups important to the adopter. For example, when decentralization
In Organizations is highly fashionable it is difficult for business managers or gov-

JG


FOLLOWING STANDARDS % be
35

mments to avoid following standards of decentralization

leaders may also be limited by pressure from within: if the cit
employees of a company believe that

The options open to

1zenry of a state or the

a certain standard is |
| | s particularly reasonable,
natural, and good, the leadership may be virtually compelled to follow it. In a

-ountry facing economic problems, the government finds it hard to reject standards

that make the budgeting process more rigorous, even if it doubts the value of such
standards.

In other cases, an actor may be virtually forced to observe some standard but
have a wide range of standards to choose from. For example, a number of different
administrative standards may be in vogue. If the management of a certain organi-
zation declined to follow any of these standards, it would probably be accused of
not being up to date. At the same time, however, it has considerable freedom to
choose which specific standard to adopt.

When the degree of voluntariness in following a standard is low, we can expect it
to encounter resistance. At least some potential adopters may want to criticize the
standard or may even seek to change it. But in contrast to what tends to happen in
relation to directives, it 1s difficult to find either a forum in which to express criticism,
or someone to hold responsible, as we pointed out in Part I. So those affected by stan-
dards are well advised to show an interest in processes which generate standards. For
example, many companies try to join committees that develop product standards of
importance to its business, sometimes for the sole purpose of preventing the devel-
opment of any standard at all. And even if everyone recognizes the value of a partic-
ular standard it becomes more difficult to reach agreement when the standard 1s
expected to become coercive in practice. If such standards, coercive but unfavourable,
are nevertheless issued, adopters may well seek to minimize their impact. For instance,
they may try to ensure that the standards affect presentation rather than practice.

It may seem that those who wish to influence others by standards would always
prefer their standards to have a low degree of voluntariness. However, our present
discussion would indicate that this 1s not necessarily true: it becomes harder to

create such standards and to ensure that they do affect practice.

Incentives

Of course, adopters are not always forced by others to adopt a standard. Instead
they adopt a standard since they believe that it does offer an improvement on the
present solution. Adopters are likely to have similar beliefs to those of people in
general, and few standards break radically with the generally accepted ideas of their
time. In some cases though, a standard may fill a certain knowledge gap between

standardizer and adopter: the standard may deal with a problem which adopters
hich they did not previously know of

likely to hold this view of

have not noticed, or may offer a solution w

or realize to be superior. Potential adopters are more
standards if they believe that the standardizer generally knows more than they

do about what should be done—in other words, if they believe that relevant
knowledge can be found at a distance, with distant experts. In issuing standards,


1 36 A WORLD OF STANDARDS
OU)

assert a claim to such expert knowledge, as we discussed

to follow standards will of course be greater if Potential
rs’ expert status; it will be less if Potentia

standardizers generally
Chapter 3. The propensity p
adopters fully appreciate the standardize

sj ‘ 1d, wi
adopters believe that the necessary knowledge is closer at hand, with themselves or

Z . - +4 tion.
held by people with insights into their specific “ å
| P ing ac wit
Expert authority may also be viewed as something acq g the stan.

dard. A standard is not just any rule. It is also affected by the authority of the stan.
dardizer, which may be considerable. Furthermore, standardizers generally provide

arguments for using their standards, including arguments that pe IS å problem to
be solved, If there are already a number of respected adopters of the standard, this
fact will serve as an additional argument.

This package of expertise and authority, and the example of other adopters, jg
useful for someone who wants to promote a certain standard. For example, it Å
helpful to organizational leadership with little authority: reference to a4 standard
improves the chances that the members will do what the leaders want, or that out-
side parties will accept what the organization has done. In such cases leaders will
try to present their proposals as being in accordance with standards, The expert
authority of standards may even be more important to organizational leaders than
the exact features of what is done. Even if the standard does not agree exactly with
what the leadership would have wished, following it is preferable to frustrating and
perhaps fruitless attempts to sell the leadership’s own solution to members and out-
siders. For instance, management may find it hard to impose its own administrative
solution but easier to introduce an internationally recognized administrative
standard that comes reasonably close to it. While following a quality standard js
complicated and expensive, it may also be a way for a management to gain accep-
tance for certain changes which it desires and which can be presented as measures
to improve quality.

Observing a standard may also be seen as a partial abdication of responsibility;
one may reduce one’s responsibility somewhat by following in the footsteps of
others, rather than going one’s own way. We expect that individuals and manage-
ments wishing to lighten the burden of their responsibility will be receptive to
standards.

Not only the advantages but also the disadvantages of a standard have a bearing
on whether an actor will follow it. And there are several disadvantages. For exam-
ple, limitation of responsibility will be viewed negatively by those who think that
assuming responsibility is the right thing to do; someone who wants to show how
much he is contributing to the success of his organization will probably prefer his
own solutions to standards. Another drawback to standards is that they often pre-

vent an actor from doing or saying exactly what he wants. Finally, changing one’s
practice in accordance with a standard may be costly, but the more consistent exist-
ing practice is with the standard, the less the cost will be. It is easiest to follow stan-
dards which can be used to describe one’s practice as it already is or as it is planned

to be, provided the standards are also consistent with the desired manner of pre-
sentation.


FOLLOWING STANDARDS 13/
When many actors tollow the same stand

é | ards by Changing their practice or pre-
many of them will also be do:

ng the same things. In such cases standard-

; inten: 16 next chapter we identify the factors that
present for uniformity to result.

will have led to uniformity. In ¢

ization
must be


10

Standardization and Uniformity

Nits BRUNSSON

Uniformity is typical of today’s world. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
explorers were still astounded by the vast extent to which people S customs, Mores.
beliefs, and possessions differed from place to place; at that time much stil] remained
to explore and discover. Nowadays an explorer would be more struck by the
similarities everywhere. Automobiles, McDonald’s fast food, the organization of
government, social problems, what we read in the newspapers, and everyday life in
general—all are remarkably alike the world over. There is little left to explore and
discover, and for that reason there are not many explorers today, either
Anthropologists wanting to report on something different must seek out increas-
ingly remote and desolate places, or else resign themselves to writing about the sub-
stantially smaller differences between the major cultures at centre Stage. The
unfortunate tourist in search of something new is fed folklore, which bears little or
no relation to the prevailing culture; in many cases it is a rather recent Invention
(Hobsbawm and Ranger 1983).

It is often assumed that standardization will lead to uniformity. In everyday lan-
guage ‘standardized’ and ‘uniform’ are often treated as synonyms. The result of
standardization—intended or not—is thought to be that many will resemble each
other in appearance and behaviour. To be sure, the production of standards is the
cause behind some of the global uniformity that we find today, but it is not the only
cause. And standardization may not bring about as much uniformity as expected.

In this chapter we discuss the relationship between standardization and unifor-
mity. While in the preceding chapter we examined the consequences of standards
for individual actors, here we discuss standardization in relation to groups of actors.
In order to clarify the role of standardization in producing uniformity, we first

review several other processes which can also lead to uniformity. We then discuss
how standards can contribute to this outcome.

Pa ee lye _—

Processes that create uniformity

Uniformity means that many are alike; whatever is of interest—be it products, edu-
cation, or the form of organization—will be the same. Social scientists seeking to
understand why similarities arise have often started with the similarities themselves.
They have wondered why a particular practice, form of organization, or other phe-

Aa


STANDARDIZATION AND UNIFORMITY 139
jomenon has become commonplace. Often a speci

— that of diftusion.
process that of d I

al metaphor is used for this

Uniformity through diffusion

piffusion Is å concept commonly used in the social sciences to describe and explain
uniformity (Strang and Meyer 1993). Most often the concept refers to the ul
result of a process: when a phenomenon is common it is said to be widely diffused
Sometimes, however, the concept is deliberately or unintentionally used to desis
nate the process itself: the similarities are claimed or assumed to have arisen through
a process of diffusion. When something is diffusing, it spreads from the centre to

the periphery. Diffusion of new ideas, things, or techniques means that these spread
ro increasingly remote places.

Processes of diffusion may be compared to epidemics, where contagion is an
important process (March 1981): individuals, societies, organizations, etc. in close
contact with the source of the ‘infection’ or with other ‘infected’ units are easily
infected themselves; that is, they tend to be receptive to what is being diffused. An
infection may also be spread by carriers that show no symptoms. The carrier of a
disease may be a rat or a mosquito. In the world of organizations the infection—a
new management technique, for instance—may be spread by consultants. These

may move from organization to organization, selling their ideas, or they may infect
numerous organizations at the same time at major conferences.

An absolute requirement of models which are supposed to explain similarities is
that they also can explain differences. In the diffusion model, differences are usu-
ally explained by time and distance: those who are (still) different have not yet
come in contact with what is being diffused (most probably since they are located
at the periphery).

The diffusion model is based on a physical metaphor. The critical explanatory
factor is contact with certain others who possess special knowledge. The model has
traditionally been used to explain rather slow processes, such as the gradual spread
of new agricultural methods from the inventors to increasingly remote places
(Smith et al. 1927). It is often assumed, implicitly or explicitly, that lack of infor-
mation about the phenomena being diffused is a major obstacle to uniformity. For
example, it takes time for all the peripheral actors to accept a superior new agri-
cultural technique because ‘nformation about the new technique spreads slowly.

The notion of diffusion seems well adapted to certain physical processes; for
example, undesired air pollutants are diffused from a source Over large areas. It may
also be appropriate for social processes, when information is a scarce resource, as
was often the case in older societies: knowledge spread slowly from one place to

another. | |
In modern society, however, there is often no shortage of information. New

technologies, new methods of organization, Or NEW clothing fashions are diffused

by the mass media with lightning rapidity throughout the world. Almost everyone
is ‘infected’ with this information at virtually the same time. However, not


== ii tn il ss nn AE GT mi —-——— ll ee r AE ote: Ure Van

IN: DSG Ka IO i EE gg ret Da GER" ml RD oe å GJE fr ri eg Og ey ee

——
“

—-

140 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

becomes like the others. Therefore, the diffusion of information

everyone actually = | | | | |
7 laining either uniformity or diversity,

seems to be of limited value in exp ea bett ;
€ sym to require er understand;
A more thorough explanation would see q anding of

those who receive diffused information. A simple modification oe the basic diffy.
sion model is to introduce the concept of immunity: certain individuals or Units
have intrinsic qualities that protect from infection despite exposure to what is being
diffused. For instance, they may be too poor to invest IN a new, MOTE expensive
agricultural technique. A more radical deviation from the simple diffusion model js
to treat the adopters as actors. Unlike the effects of air pollution, social Practices are
influenced by human beings. So we can assume that if a certain practice is to ‘arise’
in a new location, an actor has made a deliberate choice to start acting in this par-
ticular way (Malinowski 1927; Latour 1986). If we assume that receivers of infor.
mation are active, and we examine what they do, we will probably find other and
perhaps better explanations for uniformity and diversity than those the diffusion
model can offer.

A more actor-oriented explanation of uniformity should begin with the
processes that determine how the actors will behave. The question will be why a
large number of them will behave in the same way. Note that the actors themselves
need not know that their behaviour is similar. Nor need they try to resemble one
another. With an actor-based approach, we may distinguish three different
processes which can give rise to similarities: innovation, imitation and conformity
to rules. Following standards falls into the last category.

Uniformity through innovation

Uniformity may arise through innovation, when several actors independently con-
ceive and implement the same ideas. If they are in similar situations and face simi-
lar problems, they may find similar solutions. For example, if the employees of
many organizations believe strongly in their own individuality and right to decide
for themselves (Thomas et al. 1987), it may be that numerous employers will adopt
similar, more decentralized forms of organization. Or if more and more people
begin to see themselves as customers of public organizations rather than citizens,
then many of these organizations may adopt the methods of private business in
dealing with these new ‘customers’.

We should expect innovative processes to result in more similarities among
actors, the greater the number of them that share the same view of themselves, their

situation, and their problems, and the fewer the possible actions and solutions to
the problems. If many would like to get rich but there are few ways to do so, then
many will bet on the lottery. If it is commonly held that organizations should be
flexibly to a varied environment, and decentralization is con-


STANDARDIZATION AND UNIFORMITY 141

1ctors view their situation or their problems in m

| | | arkedly different ways, or when
here are many possible solutions to their problen

IS.

Uniformity through imitation

Unlike innovation, imitation means that actors deliberately copy each other; when
you imitate someone, you try to learn how that person acts and then do the same

yourself. If imitation 1s successful, there will be similarity, at least between the imi-
rator and the imitated.

The probability that many will become similar through imitation increases, the

more the imitators and the fewer the imitated. A social structure with a small élite

and large masses trying to imitate the élite will thus favour uniformity. To take an

extreme example, if everyone imitates a single individual, there is a high probabil-
ity of uniformity among all actors. The fact that children imitate their parents need
not result in very great similarities among children from different families, since
there are many different parents. On the other hand, when young people imitate
world-famous individuals, perhaps in the field of popular culture, the uniformity
becomes much greater; there are few such role models and many young people.

Even if those imitated are numerous, imitation may give rise to considerable uni-
formity if those imitated resemble each other. If the parents who are imitated are
similar, then their children will be, too. Thus, a homogeneous culture creates both
similar parents and similar children. But in a global perspective, parents are dissim-
ilar because they belong to different cultures. At the same time, there are individ-
uals who are popular throughout the world. In this situation the processes of
imitation which we have assumed to exist will tend to make children more alike as
they grow older: a kind of global youth culture will emerge.

The number of imitators will depend in turn on how many believe that they
already resemble a particular model to begin with. For we tend to imitate those
whom we resemble rather than those whom we find different from ourselves. A
state is less likely to imitate a sports club than another state; a school is less likely to
imitate a hospital than another school. If you consider your company to be a
‘knowledge company’ you are likely to imitate other such companies that you
know to be successful; and processes of imitation will result in more uniformity,
the more enterprises there are that see themselves as ‘knowledge companies’, and
the fewer well-known, successful ‘knowledge companies’ there are to imitate.

However, imitation may fail to achieve the intended similarity (Sevon 1996).
Information on what is imitated may be insufficient, and it may be difficult for the
imitator to act on it. Further, the imitator is often not interested in perfect imita-
tion but would like to add his own ingredients. Imitation is then mixed with inno-
vation (Malinowski 1927; Latour 1986; Westney 1987; Sahlin-Andersson 1996;
Sevon 1996). | | vehi

In practice it is often difficult to observe directly what the desired object of imi-
tation is doing. What it says—or others say—that it is doing may be all that the
would-be imitator has to go on. Such reports may be expressed in rather abstract


on. ie ign pie et, nd Ge på Ks TET FT MØ ER

——— pr ØO0GSS55G5-5 EPJ SJ TAES SG SG" Ji GJE Dr Pk > mr Ae gg th DA Sil ag gi gr ME IO pp Arr JE ERE NPE > Er Å it AEE BS et

142 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

ase imitation is not unlike following a standard. Of COUTSE, One

may also imitate others’ reports directly—that _— ae what they are saying.
It is usually much simpler to imitate talk rather t lan pr Ice, SINCE it is Benerally
easier to hear what is being said than to see what iS being done. In such Situations
imitation tends to produce more uniformity in talk than va amon, |

When uniformity has been analysed in terms of diffusion models, It has some.
times been thought that diffusion takes place through imitation. We would then
have an explanation for why information 1s considered a scarce resource. Since jt
may take time to find information on what others are doing, the Process of diffu.
sion may be slow, particularly if it involves successive imitation: the original js imi-
tated by an actor, who in turn is imitated by the next actor, and so on.

In the strict sense of the word, imitation of others’ actions is probably not the
most common way to uniformity, at least not among organizations. As with the
diffusion model, there is a danger that researchers may confuse the outcome with
what has led up to it. Uniformity as an outcome is sometimes referred to as imita-
tion, even though it may not be due to imitation. Individuals and organizations
have limited opportunities to observe what their counterparts are doing in practice:
they are thus often in a poor position to imitate each other’s actions. They are
somewhat more likely to imitate what others are saying about themselves. And,
more important, they have access to another kind of talk, namely numerous stan-
dards that they may follow.

terms, in which c

Uniformity and following standards

Rules and adherence to them may also create uniformity. One may say that uni-

formity is the purpose or point of rules—a rule expresses the idea that actors of a
certain kind should do the same thing in a particular kind of situation. Normally
several actors will behave in a similar manner on several occasions.

In Chapter 1 we distinguished three kinds of rules: directives, norms, and stan-
dards. There are certain differences among these rules in regard to their conse-
quences for uniformity. Both directives and standards can be used with the explicit
purpose of creating uniformity. Unlike standards, directives can be backed up by
sanctions; we may assume that the force of the sanctions and the possibility of
applying them affects the degree to which directives can lead to uniformity.

The power of norms to establish uniformity depends on their prevalence: that is,
on how many believe in them. What factors determine the belief in norms? This

me theories of organizations, uniformity is often explained by the fact that a par-
ticular norm has many adherents, but it has been much more difficult to determine


STANDARDIZATION AND UNIFORMITY 143

he previous chapter, following standards means that we try to translat

formulated rule into terms relevant to our own situation. We do not invent our

own solution, nor do we try to imitate anyone else (even though standards are

often accompanied by references—true or untrue—to others who have successfully
followed them).

Below we discuss what determines whether stand

a generally

ards will create uniformity or
ell as on the standards and the

is; to what degree the standards

compete with each other; and how similar they are.

Information

A standard should be widely known among potential adopters if it is to produce
similarity among many of them. Standards are generally quite easy to recognize.
Normally they are published and actively marketed. As has been noted, would-be
imitators may have problems in obtaining relevant information; someone wanting
to follow standards will seldom have the same difficulty. Standards often figure
actively in the public discourse on various phenomena. Relevant actors will nor-
mally be familiar with this discourse and may sometimes participate in it. Engineers
in telecommunications follow what is written and said by experts, debaters, and
standardizers in the telecommunications area; many become actively involved
themselves. Those with power to make changes in forms of administration can eas-
ily find standards in the literature on management. Makers of government policy
on administration will have no trouble finding standards in this field; as we saw in
Chapter 7, many of them participate in designing these standards.

Thus, a lack of uniformity is seldom due to insufficient information about stan-
dards—contrary to the assumptions of the classic models for diffusion of social phe-
nomena. Even though not all standards are equally perceptible above the roar of
the media, some standards are noticed by many, thus making uniformity possible.

The number of actors

A lack of uniformity has more to do with the potential adopters of a standard than
with lack of information. Not all of these will find the information about the stan-
dard relevant. And the number of potential adopters varies. As we noted in the last
chapter, in order to choose whether to follow a standard, one must be free to
choose and capable of acting independently; in other words, one must be an sær

The number of independent actors varies with the degree of centralization in the

social system. There are few such actors In extremely centralized systems. A highly
gle actor: only central management has the

centralized organization constitutes a sin


a ee TDK DØR i.

— - ee we

ee ee ee

- nr ———— pg
vr

_ «sad - +

144 A WORLD OF STANDARDS
å sample, which standards the organization will follow In
power to decide, for vm at xy units or even individuals that ¢ ;
decentralized organization there are many UT an fun
§ PORT ship with a planned economy, there w:
tion as actors. In a centralized dictatorship * ; DENG Will be
considerably fewer actors than in decentralized an | ke “conomies,

Indeed, the number of actors seems generally to be or as described In
Chapter 2. In recent decades 1t has become more ops | People to think of
themselves as individuals with the right to choose for — rather than hav
ing to follow detailed directives from states, families, _ en Or
employers. In many areas more decentralized structures have een introduced
making the development of individualism more feasible. More individual ACtors
have been appearing. Similarly, the number of actors in the form of Organizations
has increased through the recent trend in both the private and the public sector in
many countries for large hierarchies to split up into smaller, highly autonomoys
companies or public services; such ‘outsourcing’, the warms of Separate "business
units’, ‘privatization’, or the forming of public-sector organizations’ create more
organizations that are full-fledged actors (Brunsson and Sahlin-Andersson forth-
coming).

When there are more actors, more can follow standards. If the other Conditions
for uniformity through standardization are met, there may be a high degree of uni-
formity, sometimes much greater even than in centralized systems (Meyer and
Scott 1983). Fads spread quickly to parts of the world where individuals enjoy
extensive liberty. Autonomous organizations tend to be receptive to many admin-
istrative standards and tend to become similar (Meyer and Rowan 1977: Rovik
1998). When Swedish municipalities decentralized and established fairly
autonomous local entities, these entities developed conspicuously similar policies,
thereby undermining an important purpose of the decentralization reforms.

Sometimes centralization may even be essential if differences are to be preserved;
a central actor can actively try to establish differences within his field of control, for
instance by issuing directives in this direction. More totalitarian states have been
better than most modern democracies at maintaining economic differences among
individuals. In Sweden local governments are highly autonomous actors with com-

paratively loose connections to the central state: they are more homogeneous than
the state agencies that are under direct state control.

=

Relevance: The identity and situation of the actor

Whether an actor will follow standards depends, as mentioned in the previous
chapter, on how that actor defines its own reality. If many actors consider them-
selves to be basically alike, they tend to find the same standard relevant; if they do,

are likely to argue that many are similar to each other.

A distinguishing feature of the modern, global world is the existence of
groups of actors that define themselves in the same way the world


STANDARDIZATION AND UNIFORMITY 145
aver—48 individuals, organizations, nation-states

, Physicians, companies. demo-
cies etc. In other words m p ,
cra “

| any consider themselves basically simil
af: Standards directed to such general actors are

(Sera and Meyer 1993). This situation leads read
mity: ISO claims that its

ar to many oth-

likely to be adopted by many

a | ily to a high degree of unifor-
0 series are the world’s most widely sold standards.
Unlike many other standards ISO 9000 standards are intended for all organizations

not just for particular ones, such as manufacturers of certain kinds of products; both
municipalities and manufacturers of separators follow ISO 9000, but only the lat-
ter follow the CEN standards for separators. And throughout the world, the greater

the number of phenomena classified as organizations, the greater the number to
which ISO 9000 is relevant.

As noted in the previous chapter, the situation of the potential adopter is also rel-
evant to the observance of standards. If many actors believe that they are in the kind

of situation in which the standard is to apply, uniformity will be more probable; if
many have the same problem, many are likely to adopt the standard that is intended
to solve that problem. Advice on dealing with economic crises will have more fol-
lowers if many find that they have economic problems. And in fact, problems tend
to be similar for many actors of the same kind. One explanation is that opinions on
what the important problems are tend to become world-wide fads. Another may
be that certain problems go with being a certain kind of actor: individuals will
always have problems in weighing independence against dependence; organiza-
tions will always have to find a balance between central control and local freedom;
every nation-state has problems in reconciling democracy with efficient govern-
ment. Standards that are said to solve such problems will always be in demand.

Interpreting standards

If a standard is so abstract or unclear that it can be interpreted in different ways,
it may attract more followers, who can adapt their interpretation of the standard
to their needs and preferences. But when such adaptations are made there 1s no
guarantee of uniformity, even if there are many followers of a standard; there is
little uniformity if followers interpret the standard differently. Since highly
abstract standards allow for a variety of different interpretations, there may be sub-
stantial variation among actors who try to follow them. The range of possible
interpretations is particularly wide when abstract standards are to be translated into
practical action.

On the other hand, there is often less room for interpretation of what is to be
said. Just as in the case of imitation, standards may produce considerable uniformity
in what actors say that they do, but less uniformity in what they actually do. What
actors say is more influenced by standards than what they do. This means that many
actors talk in one way and act in another. Standardization helps produce de-
coupling’ and hypocrisy (Brunsson 1989). For example, at One point many munic-
ipalities claimed that they had introduced or were introducing a particular admin-
istrative method then in vogue, the purchaser-provider model; at the same time


146

ties (Fernler 1996). | ve
( fication of compliance with standards 1s intended to ensure that the local
Certificatio deviate excessively from what has bees

. : | dard do not
interpretations of a given stan | | |
3ened as correct. Certification should thus prevent the interpretation of 4 stan.

dard from varying too greatly. However, while certification is often intended to
investigate what is actually done, it is often in practice based on what is said to be

| | ction.
done, thus enforcing uniformity of talk rather than of a

Implementation

Implementation of standards means attempting to make them affect what jg done.
Processes of implementation may lead to differences among actors seeking to fol.

low the same standard. Even if the managers of an organization, for example, inter.
pret a particular standard in the same way as other managers do, it is not certain that
the practices of their organizations will be very similar. Since the specific Circum-
stances of implementation differ, the practices may differ as well. Those who are to

implement a standard may be sceptical about certain aspects of it, and more Willing
to follow it in some respects than in others. And different aspects of a standard may

appeal to different implementors in different organizations.
The implementation of standards may further diminish their effectiveness in

establishing uniformity. But the standards can still produce uniformity of Presenta-
tion in cases when presentation need not be very representative of Practice; in sjt-
uations where hypocrisy is possible. This is often the case in large Organizations
where few have insights into actual practice. And in polls people may present their
actions as following popular standards even if these standards do not govern their
actual practice. Following a standard in what we say may be quick and easy, but
implementing it in practice often takes longer. As in the case of the purchaser-
provider model above, fads or fashions can spread rapidly when there js little
requirement for time-consuming implementation or when no one checks whether
implementation has occurred.

In many situations there are strict requirements of uniformity in presentation,
but much more latitude is allowed in implementation. As we showed in Chapter
5, the ISO 9000 standards are largely about presentation rather than practice, For
certification of conformity to the standard, objectives and procedures must be cor-
rectly expressed in writing; what is done in practice receives little attention. By the
same token, reviewing a company to determine whether it meets its European
Union product-safety requirements is actually about whether it claims to have

internal procedures to assure safety, and not about the safety of the products them-
selves (Jacobsson 1993).

The abstract nature of standards means that their effect on the degree of unifor-
mity of presentation and of practice differs. As previously noted, standards that are
highly abstract are less likely than more concrete ones to create uniformity in prac-
tice. For presentations we should expect the opposite effect, at least in cases when


STANDARDIZATION AND UNIFORMITY 147
«esentations are required to reflect practice with re
5 ‘ > .

agtract standard may be used for presenting a gre
jopters being accused of misrepresenting re
4 for presenting fewer practices,

asonable accuracy. A highly
Cat variety of practices, without the
ality. A less abstract standard can be
LISE

Competing standards

The degree of uniformity is also dependent on the number of competing stand
available to a particular target gr oup and for a particular area of actitivities. If t
are many standards to choose from, those who follow the standards need not
become Very much alike. In many spheres of standardization, particularly in prod-
uct standardization, attempts are made to limit the number of competing standards,
preferably to a single standard. When these attempts are successful, uniformity is

highly probable—in other words, all who are willing to follow standards are likely
to act or express themselves in the same way.

Nevertheless, many attempts to set one standard have failed, and there have con-
tinued to be competing standards. There are numerous examples of such compet-
ing standards, not least in the case of product standards: standards for electrical plugs
still differ from country to country; there are still variations in the distance between
railway rails and tracks, etc. And there are many administrative standards, each
proposing a somewhat different method of organization. Here, in contrast to prod-
uct standardization, there is rarely any effort to agree on a single standard; on the
contrary, it 1s important to many standardizers to launch new and different stan-
dards on a continuing basis. The same is true of many standards that tell individu-
als how to live their lives.

When there are many competing standards the result may be varying degrees of
uniformity and diversity. As we shall see, the significant factors are the similarities
among the competing standards and their relative attractiveness.

Although many standardizers in the area of administration seek to differentiate
their standards from those of competitors, these efforts are not always successful. As
we showed in Chapter 5, there may be fundamental similarities between standards
which superficially appear somewhat different: administrative standards are usually
based on a particular view of organizations as being clearly defined, manageable
units for which planning is feasible and appropriate. When competing standards are
similar in this way or others, those who follow them will resemble each other in
word or deed, no matter which standards they have adopted. Thus, similarities
among the standards will lead to similarities among those standardized. For exam-
ple, followers of the quality standards described in Chapter 8 will all introduce or
maintain procedures for planning and evaluation, or will claim that they have. |

When there are several competing standards, there will be greater uniformity if
certain standards gain more followers than others. One of the standardizers may

command more authority than others, or many actors may find some erty
more attractive than others for other reasons. Without such differences among the

: , ards.
standards, there will be greater diversity among adopters of the standa

ards
here


»
~~ å

J—— IG ØRS yp

td er.

we: :
rå EE EE V= BØE SD GA an

nr rd

- re oc ewe

7 — —

ey ee ee
4 -

«STANDARDS
A WORLD OF 5
148

it factor is whether adopters find uniformity desirable, To the
ant fac ose standards that others have adopted A

even be tha
self-reinforcing process may then result; the outcome may porn Leverer å
Kollen the same standard, so that competition among standards virtually ceases

wing way to monopoly. The qwerty standard for typewriter keyboards is hardly
optimal but the need for uniformity 1s so great that few find it feasible to deviate

from this standard. | |
In other cases the adopters see no point in following the example of others, If

they observe a particular standard, their reason for doing so Is not that they expect
others to do the same. They may even find it to their disadvantage to do as others
do; individuals and organizations not uncommonly seek to maintain their Own dis-
tinctive profile. In such cases competition among standards is more likely to con-
tinue than to be replaced by monopoly. |

In some areas globalization has led to a larger number of competing standards; in
others, to fewer. International standards organizations have sought to reduce the
number of competing standards through international standards designed to replace
those at the national level. These efforts have contributed to greater uniformity, By
contrast, in other areas globalization has encouraged the proliferation of competing
standards. For instance when management gurus have reached out to an international
audience, companies in all countries have been exposed to more standards than when
they listened only to domestic gurus. Foreign food recipes have spread to all coun-
tries, and these standards have affected practice, so that we now find Thai, Chinese,
French, and almost all other cuisines in restaurants in all the larger cities of the world.
instead of just the local cuisine. The diversity within each city has increased.

Another import A
| O
extent that they do, they will tend to c

Standards for diversity

Even where standards give rise to uniformity, they normally allow for some diver-
sity as well. Standards may also make existing diversity more visible. The fact that
actors follow standards enables us to see how they differ in some other respects. The
world of sport provides one example. When all football teams follow the standards
of football, it also becomes clear how they use their non-standardized freedom of
action in different ways. Differences that are essential within sport become appar-
ent: we can now tell which is the better team, since we know who has won the
game played by the rules. In such cases standards clearly regulate not only what shall
be similar but also what shall be different.

The same applies to markets as well, where there is also a combination of stan-
dardization and freedom of action. Here, too,
that is, non-standardized—zone. If all the t
telephones are standardized and successfully
ited to design, service, and price, and these
used in competition among producers,

The EU has been accused of conductin
tion which permits only price compet

competition takes place in the free—
echnical aspects and components of
made uniform, diversity will be lim-
will be the characteristics that can be

g and encouraging a kind of standardiza-
ition, allegedly ruling out compeuton


STANDARDIZATION AND UNIFORMITY
149

sugh development of new and improved products

progress: age _ a may be levelled at all far-reaching product stan-
jardization. t the same time, however, some degree of standardization f ay
variation in the unregulated sphere. For example, if screw threadin ak men
da «dized, exchange between machinery manufacturers and their Su . E å PG
ore complicated; the effect will be to hamper the development ey iers Wi i
gs NO ew types o

Components may be standardized while products consist of different combina-
“ons of these components. By choosing a unique combination of components, a
company IS able to offer a unique product. In other cases, the ee of the
whole may not be unique. To return to the example of restaurants mentioned
above, the diversity among restaurants within each city has increased since they
now serve different cuisines. On the other hand, the diversity among the cities has
decreased: the set of restaurants within each city is similar to those of other cities:
the cities all contain Thai, Chinese, etc. restaurants. Large cities are uniform in the
sense that their supply of restaurants is equally varied and varied in roughly the same
way.

Product standards may also be intended to establish only a moderate degree of
uniformity, so that many different products are compatible with other products
without being copies of each other. Standardizing functions instead of form is also
a way of limiting the requirements of similarity without doing away with them

entirely; such standards specify the function to be fulfilled by the product but not
exactly how it is to be designed.

hr and thus retarding technical

Achieving uniformity through standards

Standards may contribute to uniformity, an effect that standardizers often seek. But
as we have shown here, the uniformity that results from standards is often limited.
Obviously, for one standard to be accepted and uniformity to occur, it 1s not
enough that people see a benefit from being similar to others. We have argued that
the degree of uniformity will depend on the characteristics of the adopters, of the
standards, and of the standardizers.

Uniformity is dependent on the adopters in several ways. Uniformity tends to be
greater when there are more actors; when actors believe that they belong to few,
broad categories of actors and, likewise, when many share views on their situation;
and when actors see a benefit in doing as others do. Uniformity of practice is more
likely if adopters interpret and implement standards in similar ways; uniformity of
talk is more likely if a high degree of hypocrisy is possible.

Uniformity is dependent on several characteristics of the standards. Uniformity will
tend to be greater if there are few competing standards, if a few standards are much
more competitive than others, or if competing standards are similar. Abstract standards
will promote uniformity of talk but will not promote uniformity in practice. |

Uniformity is also dependent on standardizers. The number of competing
standards and the tendency for certain standards to attract a greater following than


;
i
Å I
5
i

nd POF OS a et 8 em ->- — aan

g ER on

150 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

the authority of different standardizers and on how effec.
dards is spread. When standardizers Introduce

more probable, particularly of how

others are influenced by
tively information about various stan ed
processes of certification, uniformity W1

tice is presented.
Standard organizations like ISO and CEN try to use several of these factors to

create situations that will promote uniformity. They make strong efforts to spread

| , hasize the benefits of uniformity—
information about their standards and they emp | nity
the usefulness of everyone following the same standard, Benefits of uniformity are
created in a very concrete way when standards organizations succeed in commit.
ting central actors to a standard, so that others who want to interact with these have
to follow the standard. Most notably standards organizations seek to achieve 4
monopoly for their standards by establishing a monopoly for their standardizing
authority. According to ISO’s formal definition (presented in Chapter 1), a stan
dard is to be issued by a ‘recognized body’.

If standardizers want their standards to be widely followed, they cannot gener-
ally build on their authority only. They should define the adopters and the situa-
tions to which their standards apply in broad, inclusive terms, just as standardizers
of quality systems have done. As described in Chapter 8, these standardizers defined
adopters very broadly as businesses and other organizations regardless of whether
they were industrial companies, schools, or something else. And all needed quality
systems. The standards focused on presentation rather than practice and were quite
abstract. The standards were readily acceptable to organizations, since they were
consistent with generally accepted views on how organizations should be pre-
sented—largely the conventional wisdom of the popular management culture
referred to in Chapter 5. And the standards were also remarkably similar; those who
followed them became similar to others no matter which specific quality standard
they used. In addition, two of the standardizers discussed in Chapter 8 used a cer-
tification procedure to determine whether their standards were being followed. It
is no wonder that many units come to have similar systems for quality management
or at least that they make similar claims as to what system they have.

Since the standards created by standards organizations are intended to remain in
effect over a longer period, they should be fairly stable over time and not readily
changeable. Thus, they should provide for uniformity not only over space—over

several actors, products, etc.—but over time as well. Uniformity in these two
dimensions is the theme of the next chapter.


11

Standardization and Fashion Trends

Nits BRUNSSON

In the previous chapter we looked at uniformity and diversity in space. It is also

possible to speak of uniformity and diversity across time, that is, of stability and
change. Actors can talk or act in similar or different ways at different times. There
can be different combinations of uniformity and diversity over time and in space.

First, there can be great similarities across both space and time—many things are
similar for long periods of time. This can happen, for example, when a standard
becomes institutionalized; when it becomes a stabilized mode of action. As men-
tioned in Chapter 1, using a fork when eating was a standard in the sixteenth cen-
tury that has long since become a norm and a general practice.

Secondly, there can be great diversity across both time and space. For example,
schools may follow changing standards for schools while hospitals follow changing
standards for hospitals; when the standards change, so do schools and hospitals, but
without becoming similar to each other.

Thirdly, strong uniformity can exist across time while there is much diversity
across space—actors can be stable in their differences. It is an eternal truth that some
standards apply to Jupiter and some to the ox (Licet Jovi, non licet bovi), and in fact
they seem to consistently to behave differently.

Finally, there can exist a great uniformity across space but a small one across time;
many actors are similar to each other in each period, but the characteristics that are
similar are not stable: the similar characteristics are different in different periods.
The combination of a high degree of uniformity in space, and diversity or varia-
tion across time, is often designated as fashion; here it will be called fashion trend.
Fashion trends can characterize clothing styles or car models, and be mainly con-
cerned with aesthetics. But fashion trends also exist in other areas that are usually
considered more technical; they can, for example, be about more ‘serious’ things
such as what techniques we use to achieve certain ends in business, politics, or child
care (Abrahamson 1996a). Certain methods are extremely popular and common
during a particular time but are later replaced by other methods. Many people like
the same clothing style and dress the same, many managers believe in the same
administrative techniques, and many governments attempt to resolve labour mar-
ket issues in a similar manner at a certain time, only to later change their prefer-
ences and do things differently but still in the same manner as the others. These are

the types of events that we examine in this chapter.


yu

i

152 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

Fashions and fashion trends
differentiate between what is popular and

what is common. In these theories, a fishion designates both what is well known
| < characteristic of what many practise or present

definition is too broad for our purposes. Something can
hout being characteristic of the practice or presen-

tations of the practice of a larger group. Haute couture fashion ge not always be
reflected in many people’s way of dressing. And something an i common with-
out being very popular. Smoking was high fashion in the 193 > A in many coun-
tries the percentage of smokers was not higher then than at the beginning of the
1990s, when smoking was definitely not fashionable. |

For our purposes ‘fashion’ designates something that » well known and popular
among many and which changes over time; the term “fashion trend is used for
describing what actors actually do, to designate common and changing behaviour.
A fashion has to do with what people know, like, and pay attention to. Fashions can
consist of ideas, models, or things that are well known and popular. They can also
consist of well-established or popular rules. Fashions can consist of standards that
are well known and generally liked, of generally shared norms, or even of direc-
tives that are generally accepted. Fashion involves changes in attention—that dif-
ferent ideas etc. are attended to at different points in time; what is well known and

Theories on fashion do not generally

and popular and what
(Abrahamson 19966). This |
be well known and popular wit

popular changes over time.
A fashion trend, on the other hand, has to do with what people do, their behay-

iour. A fashion trend has many actors behaving in the same way at the same time,
while at a later time, actors will behave in a different way, but in the same way as
many others behave at that time. In order for us to be able to use the term ‘fashion
trend’ it is enough that there are differences across time and spatial similarity in sev-
eral periods. It does not require that the actors who behave similarly are the same
in each period. For example, we can talk about a fashion trend if a large propor-
tion of companies, belonging to the same population, for instance an industry, use
the same budget technique in one period and an equally large proportion use
another budget technique in the next period, even ifno company that used the first
technique ever uses the second. Often, however, the spatial similarities do include
the same actors over several periods of time: at least some of the companies which
used the first technique use the second. For instance, this may happen when what
actors do in one period affects what they do in the next.

A fashion trend is not necessarily consistent with some previous or current fash-
ion. There are other origins of fashion trends than fashions. Fashion trends may be
the result of innovation. As described in the previous chapter, innovative processes
may produce uniformity, when many actors encounter similar problems at the
same time, and there are only a limited number of ways available to resolve the
problems. If the problems shift over time fashion trends are likely. Fashion trends
can also arise through imitation, for example through the imitation of a few by the
many, and through the fact that the few change how they do things periodically.


STANDARDIZATION AND FASHION TRENDS 153

In both of these pure cases of innovation and mit

| ation fashion tre | |
> ah: ny ¢ + gå
nv corresponding fashion. ends arise with

out å |
However, fashion trends sometimes occur as the result of fash;
| shions—

mot that certain ideas, standards, norms, and so on are

eriods of time, and that this popularity affects behaviour in the same period or in
some period after. The attention paid to some standards ten

hi 4 | ds to follow fashion pat-
terns. Fas ions among stan ards are in turn a common cause of fashion trends

| | vation and imitation. We now look at stan-
dardization as an explanation for fashion trends.

through the
popular during limited

?

,

point to some relevant standards. We then have to explain uniformity in behaviour
across space—that many follow the standard: and the change—that many follow
another standard after a time. The causes can be found both in the demand and in
the supply: both with the standard adopters and with standardizers.

A high degree of uniformity in space can be explained by one or more of the
factors we mentioned in the previous chapter. The factors pertain both to the
demand and the supply side. The demand factors, which according to the last chap-
ter can be expected to promote uniformity in space, include: that the adopters are
being subject to the same information regarding standards; that they interpret and
implement those standards in similar ways; that they determine similar standards to
be relevant because they experience their identity and their situations in a similar
manner; and that the costs of complying with the relevant standard are small in
comparison with the advantages it brings. The supply factors, which can be
expected to promote uniformity, include the existence of few competing standards,
or that the competing standards are similar.

Change occurs as the result of the tendency of the adopters of standards to begin
doing things differently after a time. This also needs to be explained. The cause of
change need not be fashions in standards. There can be many other causes, one of
which may be that adopters interpret and implement the same standard in different
ways in different situations. They can, for example, let the standard affect first their
presentations and later their actions. If many start doing so, the behaviour of many
actors will change, but will still be similar to that of the others.

Other reasons for change can be that actors follow different standards at difter-
ent times—even if the general popularity of various standards has not changed—or
that they interpret old standards in a new way. One explanation for this, on the
demand side, may be that the actors’ situation changes and that certain old stan-
dards (or old interpretations) no longer fit. Different management principles can fit
differently for different businesses under different financial conditions, and, there-
fore, companies choose to follow new standards when the situation changes. If the
conditions change for many companies at the same time, this can give rise to a fash-

ion trend (Barley and Kunda 1992). Although people tend to wear similar clothes,


mnd var ae meg ate it d

i

NE BESTE 3 Se stl i DE LE ee

PCIe Ee. Se

154 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

e with the seasons. The similarity may be driven by fash.

their clothes tend to chang
the weather.

å ° : , v by

ion but the change is driven more p | |
| | ards. This fashio

In other cases change is due to fashions among stan Nn explana.

tion refers to what we have called the supply side of He at pea, to
this explanation some standards are well known and popular, but the set of such

standards changes over time: there are fashions 1n standards. [n avis words, at any
moment, or at least intermittently, there are few competing standards in an area or

competing standards are similar, and this situation meg a the next Period,
although the relevant standards in that period are different. the actors persistently
comply with these fashionable standards, they will be subject to change: what is
fashionable shifts, and thereby the behaviour of many actors. Fashion in Standards

then gives rise to fashion trends. |
Sometimes the collective belief in certain standards is so strong that these stan-

dards turn into what can be called temporary norms. Ata certain time almost every-
one may believe that the standard is the only right or sensible solution to what is
believed to be an important problem. Later the same standard may become some-
thing very far from a norm: it may be considered as another case of ‘just a fashion’,
that is, an irrational and whimsical collective myth. Fashions are more Powerful
when actors do not perceive them as fashions (Røvik 1993).

Sometimes the demand can affect the supply of standards. This may, in turn,

affect both the degree of uniformity and the pattern of change. If many people
comply with a standard, it can result in the standard becoming better known and

more popular, causing more to follow it. In consequence, the uniformity in behay-
iour increases. At a later stage or in other circumstances, the effect can be the oppo-

site: those actors, who do not want to be the same as all others, begin to demand 4
new standard to follow (Røvik 1996); this may result in a new standard becoming
popular, and this in turn can eventually lead to the actors changing behaviour while
still maintaining a high degree of uniformity: thus there is convergence around 4

new standard.
As an example of a possible combination of factors, let us apply a standard- and

fashion-based explanation to fashion trends regarding clothing. There are standard
setters (fashion houses and large producers of garments) with great authority, who
create standards that are basically similar to those created by the other fashion
houses each year. It is easy for them to spread their standards via shows of standard
models and via pictures in mass media. Many find these standards relevant—every-
body needs clothes and many want to dress fashionably. Or, whatever people think,
there is a third party, the retailers, who follow the standards by buying only fash-
ionable clothes, thus limiting the supply to consumers to such garments. All of this
serves to create spatial uniformity—people dress in similar clothes.

But there are also factors that work for change, with the result that, although
people continue to dress similarly, a few years later they are all wearing a new style.
The fashion houses have a vested interest in creating new models and, in the long
term, new fashion houses become authoritative. People find it easy to accept new
fashions, since they can afford to buy new clothes and are not compelled by a strong


STANDARDIZATION AND FASHION TRENDS 155

sed or Strong, stable preferences to have their clothe
l

| s always follow a certair

> haraute : Bø ay: a certain style
ance because, within reasonable limits, they do not need to d å

‘ _ * . * CO ‘ * .
ity of their clothing). Furthermo REG

wcal nis il
yractica » there are those who actively dem:
ations since they do not want to y demand

new crea as (0 Wear what everyone else is wearing. All
‘wall, fashion among standards then gives rise to strong fashion trends

Fashion trends for clothes can be expected to be weaker when there are no fash-
ons: for instance, when there is no central fashion authority or where such an

authority is weak: the USA and France are perhaps different in this respect; or when
actors have definite and stable preferences for specific solutions, as the os have
for work clothes. Fashion trends for clothes can also be expected ide a
when there is not much striving for originality, for example in such collective cul-
tures as China, which then will contain much uniformity over space but little vari-
ation over time.

But this is only one explanation of fashion trends. In other contexts—and indeed
for clothing styles—there can be several and other factors which explain the fash-
ion trends. The causes in fashion trends in clothes and in child care may be partially
different. Both for clothes and for other fashion trends, there may be different ele-
ments of innovation, imitation, and fashion following involved, and standards may
be more or less important. Different fashion trends require different explanations.
So it may not be very useful to try to formulate a theory for fashion trends that is
generally applicable and at the same time much more detailed than the type of
descriptions of possible causes and mechanisms that we have given here. Instead it
might be more useful to construct explanatory models for various, more specific
fashion trend situations.

The focus in all such explanations of fashion trends is on explaining the unifor-
mity in space, and the variation over time. But it is rare that uniformity and varia-
tion are total phenomena; it is more usual that many, but not all, follow fashion
trends. This also needs to be explained: explanatory models for fashion trends
should be able to cover uniformity and diversity, spatial similarity and spatial varia-
tion. And models for fashion trends should be such that they may be used for
explaining both change and stability—the fact that we sometimes experience rapid
fashion trends and that sometimes actors exhibit stable similarities.

Instead of contributing further generalizations, the rest of the chapter presents an
example of a possible more detailed, standard-based explanatory model which has
as its aim to explain a specific type of fashion trend pertaining to certain standard-
izers, standards, and adopters. The model pertains to fashion trends in organiza-

tional forms. Fashion is only one of several explanatory factors in the model.

Fashion trends in organizational forms

in the forms adopted by organiza-

One area where strong fashion trends occur 1s
tions (Abrahamson 1996a). Organizational forms are formal structures, processes,

and ideologies, presented as characteristics of ac
may include, in relation to structures, a mat

ertain organization. These forms
x organization ora purchaser-provider


156 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

ro base budgeting, or management by

organization; in relation to processes, 2 | |
ustomer orientation.

won | | : | service Or C
objectives; and in relation to ideologies, customer sdiesictaloe nike
Many organizations have similar organizational forms, an endency

to change rather quickly. snr bia senses
Fashion trends in organizational forms can perhaps sometime: explained by

innovation processes. Organizations can, for example, choose similar forms because
they work with similar things in similar environments, and these change Over time.
This is, however, contradicted by the fact that organizations in varying fields, and
with varying tasks and operations, often exhibit great similarities in form (Meyer
and Rowan 1977). Companies in different countries and industries frequently
exhibit similar forms, and companies and public sector bodies tend to be increas-
ingly similar. oo

Fashion trends in organizational forms may also occur by imitation, through the
many attempting to imitate the few, changeable others. But this explanation is not
very useful in the commonly observed case, when new forms seem to appear at
about the same time in many organizations—there does not appear to have been
time for imitation.

Fashion trends in forms may also be the result of the fact that organizations have
to comply with the same or similar directives. This is sometimes the case. Some
organizational forms, such as those of the joint stock company, are legally specified.
And legislation is, after all, the same for organizations of a certain type in any given
country, and legislation is also being harmonized internationally. When the laws
change this can give rise to fashion trends. Similarly, common norms regarding
organizational forms and concurrent norm modifications may give rise to fashion
trends.

Standardization and fashion in standards may also be important causes of fashion
trends in organizational forms. As described in earlier chapters there are many
administrative standards for organizational forms and many standardizers in this
field, who are able to disseminate their message effectively. Many organizations
comply with the same standard at any given time, and the popular standard can be
quite rapidly succeeded by another equally popular standard. Certain standards
achieve great popularity, at least when they are new. New standards receive atten-
tion in, for example, the business press. Organizations are often willing to comply
with new standards partly because no one knows for certain what the best form is.
Many organizations are active in competitive environments, where it is important
to be best, and where a new form can appear to offer a competitive advantage com-
pared to other forms. We may assume that standards and fashion among standards

is an important, if not the most important, factor behind fashion trends in organ-
izational forms.

Complex fashion trends

As we have pointed out above, there are strong tendencies toward fashion trends
In organizational forms: similarities in space without a parallel correspondence of

oe

TANDARDIZATION AND FASHION TRENDS 157

«milarity in time. Å form that is common dur: ae
| ring one period is replace |
s replaced by an

equally common but different form during another period. But the ‘rn can b

more complicated than that. At any given time one or 4 few st 3 dati Bais
izational form are fashionable. The result should be a high de if si viariey
among organizations. This may be the case, but it may be is 10 than one would
expect. A survey of popular standards for organizational forms in Swedish munic-

ipalities showed that standards, which were or had been the height of fashion in the

media and at conferences, were actually only adopted by anywhere from as little as
6 om up to /0 per cent of the municipalities studied (Johansson and Johnsson
1995).

It appears, therefore, that standards with almost unanimous support in public
opinion do not necessarily lead to a corresponding degree of uniformity.
Organizational forms may still be rather different, even if the organizations are of
the same type and nationality and belong to the same organizational field. There is
often a combination of uniformity and diversity within a field: even if many orga-
nizations comply with a fashionable standard, everyone does not. The existence of
one dominant standard does not explain all the different organizational forms. We
need to explain both the uniformity and the diversity that occur.

In practice the adoption processes and adoption patterns of an organizational
form can be quite complex. One example is the development that has occurred in
Swedish municipalities in the past few decades. In the public debate, new standards

regarding organizational forms have appeared every few years (Johansson and
Johnsson 1994). Most of these standards surfaced at the same time in other coun-

tries, both as standards in the public debate and as forms in municipalities and state
agencies (Hood 1991; Reichard 1995). The leadership in the different municipali-
ties were very familiar with the public debate (Fernler 1996), and it can be assumed
that they had all heard about the new standards at approximately the same time. A
new form was implemented in many municipalities in a short period of time, when
the form was fashionable in the public debate (Johansson and Johnsson 1994); this
means that most of the organizations had no one to imitate when they imple-
mented the new form.

However, as mentioned above, the said forms were implemented in only some
of the municipalities, and often only a minority of them. It was also difficult to find
any common characteristic between the municipalities that adopted a certain form,
for example, characteristics such as size or political majority. Nor could one find a
strong connection between the forms an individual municipality accepted: the
same organization could reject a standard at one ume, only to accept a similar stan-
dard at a later time (ibid.). Certain forms even appear to have been invented in sev-
eral municipalities at approximately the same time (Fernler 1996).

In order to explain such processes, we need an explanatory model that can
explain uniformity and rapid change: the fact that a new standard can be adopted
very quickly and at the same time by many organizations. It should also be possi-
ble to use the model for explaining diversity: the fact that many organizations do
not comply with the standard. The model should not be based on the assumption


158 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

or) ae contacts and time nec.
that organizations that become similar in form have pa reg» der uad a
essary to imitate each other. Explanations should on C see å on
that organizations have certain stable characteristics that ma prone to

follow certain standards than others. The model must pro: for e as a simi-
lar forms can appear through innovation and not necessarl y as products of standard

‘cropping up’, that is to say, | | tm
ilar forms in many but far from all organizations at the same time. In the next sec-

| TIDER, el.
tion we describe one version of such a cropping-up mod

A cropping-up model of organizational forms

The model outlined below is based on many of the factors and arguments presented
earlier in this book, particularly in earlier chapters in Part III. The model contains
three basic components: organizational forms, reforms, and discourse. The model
contains specific assumptions on the nature and dynamics of these components. It

is based on the assumption that, fundamentally, organizational forms are not things
or practices; rather, they are presentations, which must follow the rules regarding
the way we can talk about organizations. The reform processes whereby these
forms are introduced require even closer adaptation to these rules. They also
require attempts to implement the talk in practice—attempts that are often time-
consuming and frustrating. The common component that makes uniformity pos-
sible is assumed to be a broad societal discourse on organizations and on standards
for organizations.

Standards in vogue—what is popularly talked about—may not be very common
as organizational forms, and vice versa. A certain standard may even at a certain
time be considered the only way to go; yet not very many organizations—in the
extreme case none—may have implemented the standard. The model describes the
mechanisms whereby fashionable standards are, or are not, translated into local

forms, and the resulting relation between fashion and fashion trends In organiza-
tional forms.

Organizational forms

Organizational forms are part of the way organizations are presented to the exter-
nal world or to their own members by authorized people such as managers.
Organizational structures are often displayed in organization charts, while proce-
dures and ideologies appear in various policy documents. These written sources are
normally confirmed by oral presentations by management and by labels denoting
entities, practices, or ideas. The forms are presented as descriptions of the way the
organization actually works, or the way it will be working in the near future. The
forms also tend to be highly rationalized, being typically presented as means to

legitimate ends or as solutions to important problems. Or at least rationalizations
are readily available upon request (Meyer and Rowan 1977)


STANDARDIZATION AND FASHION TRENDS 159

Organizational forms are ways of talking about an organiz
rules for action that restrict our freedom to act, so the

she way we can talk, at least if we are to be belie

ation. Just as there are
re are rules for talk that restrict

dang ved or taken seriously (N. Brunsson
1995). In open societies most of these rules consist of norms and standards rather

than directives. In the model it is assumed that this is true of talk about organiza-
tions, and thus of organizational forms. Organizations cannot then be presented just
anyhow: the presentation must be adapted to ideas about what an organization can
and should be. The forms must be such that they can be regarded as possible organ-
izational forms; they should be adapted to what people consider good or at least
acceptable. In addition, they should be understandable: excessively complex or
ambiguous forms are not likely to be understood.

On the other hand, organizational forms often do not have to be as well adapted
to the practice of the individual organization. As mentioned in the preceding chap-

ter, presentation and practice may be quite different; there is some, although
seldom unlimited, room for hypocrisy.

Reforms

The processes whereby new forms are launched are referred to below as reforms.
Reforms as defined here consist of two basic activities: attempts at convincing people

that the new forms should be installed and attempts at getting them to influence prac-
tice, getting them implemented. Studies of many such reforms, in a variety of orga-
nizations (Brunsson and Olsen 1997), revealed a certain pattern, which is used here
in formulating some assumptions about the reform component of the model.

The extent and intensity of talk differed as between existing forms and new ones.
Reforms required much more mobilization and talk than existing forms. Typically
reforms produced much elaborate talk about the forms to be, and a good deal of
rationalizing argument. Reform contents were well adapted to general, aesthetic
norms of talk, such as those referring to logic, consistency, and clarity. Reform con-
tents were also adapted to what was generally considered to be a good organiza-
tion. Reforms promised major improvements in the way the organization
functioned. This made it easy to make people in organizations interested in imple-
menting reforms and reforms were common.

At the outset, reforms were described as a set of simple, general, and seemingly
very sensible—not to say beautiful—principles, consistent not only with popular
standards but also with common and more stable basic norms for organizations; for
instance, organizations were to become more goal oriented, everybody’s tasks
should be clearer and should not overlap with the tasks of others, everyone’s free-
dom to act efficiently should be increased, better planning and evaluation processes
should be installed, and so on. The principles contained standards that were popu-
lar and not controversial at the time of their introduction, such as decentralization
or management by objectives. The situation before the implementation of the
reform was described in a less favourable way: it was said to be complicated, tasks
were unclear, there were inefficiencies, and lack of local freedom, and so on.


160 A WO

duced more talk than existing forms.

) ot only pro ae
In sum, it seemed that reforms n y
for talk about organizations more Closely,

but also followed norms and ee ro ke dts Yucsaies
| t refo |
This can be explained by the fact tha

The wav we can talk about existing forms may be limited to some extent not only
by the rules for talk, but also by practice. It may et sea riaa
what to what people actually do, in particular if the ta å ore easilv ad ag
themselves. The contents of reforms, on the other hand, can be em : y adapted
to the rules geared exclusively for talk, since they are 104 sae al - ect ere
practices. Reforms include descriptions of practice: their imp i on an their
effect on practice is the main argument in their favour. But this practice is still in
the future, and can thus easily be presented as consistent with the new forms. But
reforms not only can but must be well adapted to rules for talk about organizations,
Reforms contain intentions; the forms presented are those we intend, and they are
to lead to the effects we intend. The rules regarding the intentions that we can pre-

sent are generally stricter than those applying to our presentations; ™ instance, we
may admit to bad results but we are less likely to say that we intended them. This

is true of reforms as well: we may present current organizational forms as less than
perfect, but it is more difficult not to intend to be as near to perfect as possible. It

is particularly difficult to entertain and present intentions that are not consistent
with such common norms. Nor are intentions contrary to legitimate directives

acceptable. But it is also difficult to present, argue for, and gain acceptance for

intentions that are contrary to popular standards in the discourse.
It is not being claimed that all empirical reforms are like those described here,

but the model includes this type of reform. It will be assumed that organizations are
attracted by such reforms. Since these reforms can be much more ‘beautiful’ than
possible presentations of today’s practice, most reform proposals will prevail over
the defence of most old forms. But it is still assumed that there is one major obsta-
cle to reforms, namely previous reforms.

Reforms are supposed to be implemented, that is, the principles of the reform
should be turned into detailed instructions and should affect organizational behav-
iour, and even results; and this takes time. It is hard to argue for a new reform until
the previous one has been given a serious try, particularly if the reforms concern
the same activities.

However, this obstacle is only temporary. When the new forms become exist-
ing forms, they have to be adapted somewhat to current practices, and they are
therefore likely to become less attractive: a new form will easily appear more attrac-
tive and will outcompete the existing form. And a new reform does not necessar-
ily have to wait for the full implementation—or, even less, for the results—of the
old reform; the old reform can become relatively unattractive at a much earlier
stage. This is because implementation is assumed to be an important threat to
reforms. When the beautiful principles are turned into more detailed rules and
instructions and are adapted to the special practical conditions of the specific orga-
nization, the new forms soon become less beautiful and more like the old ones, thus
losing much of their attraction. Their promises do not seem to be being fulfilled.


STANDARDIZATION AND FASHION TRENDS 161

The new forms may also become more controversial. Further, principles adapted
to rules for talk are not necessarily feasible or favourable in practice. This may
become obvious long before the reform is regarded as fully implemented—or, even
more, before it has given rise to any intended effects on daily practice. So, after a
serious attempt at implementation, the reform may fall into disrepute and may well
be interrupted by a new reform (Brunsson and Olsen 1997, ch. 3).

When reform processes look as described here, and when there is no lack of new
reform ideas, a specific pattern of reform can be established. A reform starts when
the previous reform has been in the process of implementation long enough, and
it ends when its own implementation has been under way for a while. The orga-
nization is almost continuously in the throes of some stage of a reform, but reforms
can only be launched at intervals.

The assumption of implementation as a threat to reform and the resulting pat-
tern of reform also reflected the empirical situation in the reforms studied. Reforms
easily prevailed over older forms, often over those still being implemented. A com-
mon way of ending a reform was to start a new one. In some large organizations
reforms were a standard recurring activity. Major reforms occurred often, but not
constantly—generally at intervals of a few years. A study of the 125-year history of
one large organization showed that major reorganizations took place at intervals of
3-15 years, and that the intervals between them had been shrinking in more recent
years (Brunsson et al. 1989).

Although it is assumed that reforms easily win over existing forms, a specific
reform proposal may meet competition from other reform proposals which also
contain attractive principles. It is assumed that such competition will be won by
reforms which fit better at a more detailed level with the norms and standards for
talk about intended forms, and for which more favourable and less critical argu-
ments are available. Such norms, standards, and arguments are largely produced and
reproduced in an arena other than the individual organization, namely in a general

public discourse.

Organizational discourse

As demonstrated in this book, it is not only people in individual organizations who
talk about the present and future forms in their own case; there are also a great
number of standardizers who tell others what organizational forms they should
introduce. Standards and other ideas are presented in what can be called a general
discourse. Although the discourse varies somewhat from one organizational field or
country to another, much of it is very general and treats large groups of organiza-
tions as though they were in need of the same standard forms (see Chapters 5 and
8). The discourse is to a large extent international, that is, national borders are not
thought to be important and much of the discussion takes place across such bor-
ders. Organizational problems and solutions are both discussed.

Although the standards discussed are likely to be based on some common basic
conceptions of and norms for organizations (see Chapter 5), they differ in terms of


— Sa nr

a Pe

162 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

their more detailed aspects. For example, all the me) oe may - based
Er rom the to

on the assumption that organizations should be controle Ps but they

may still differ greatly about the form that is best for pre am — |
In this discourse only a limited set of standards can be attended to at one time

The standards attended to can be variously controversial, and the level of contro.
« At one time standards may represent temporary com-

mon social norms in that almost everyone agrees that they represent the only right
| ideas. On other occasions the same standard may be challenged 7 doubted by
many, have come into widespread disrepute, or even be considered by many to be
a fashion only. |

Standards can also differ in their level of abstraction. Very specific organizational

forms are sometimes suggested as the ‘right’ ones. Zero-based budgeting might be
an example of this. In other instances the suggested forms are of senge Principled
| and abstract character, more in the nature of slogans than recipes. Back to basics’.
concentrating on the ‘core’ business, and decentralization are cases in point. At an
even higher level of abstraction the discourse may concern problems but no spe-
cific solutions: there may be a large measure of agreement 1n identifying the impor-
tant and urgent problems, without any very specific suggestion being made about
specific standard forms that could perhaps provide a solution. As mentioned above,
the attention paid to problems varies just as much as the attention paid to solutions:
there are fashions in both. In the 1970s the lack of internal democracy in organi-
zations was a fashionable problem; later, inadequate customer orientation and cost
efficiency were among the problems in vogue.
Å Knowledge of this general discourse is not ‘outside’ the organizations; people
working on the managing and reforming of organizations are aware of the dis-
course and may even take part in it. In the cropping-up model it is not assumed
that knowledge about problems and standards and the discourse in general is 4
scarce resource. Rather, it is assumed that people interested in organizational issues
will hear very quickly about any new standards, regardless of where these origi-
nated: they will all be reported widely in the media and interested people follow
the media.

This kind of discourse is thus added to our model. We assume that a set of orga-
nizations is connected to a common discourse. The discourse provides standards
| regarding what are acceptable or good organizational forms, arguments in favour
of the standards, and problems that require solutions.

The standardizers participating in the discourse have a certain authority that can
be referred to when people want to argue for reform in their own organization.
The standards in the discourse help to explain which reforms are chosen by indi-
vidual organizations: they may serve as an important inspiration for reformers who
are designing a new reform, and they can determine which of several reform pro-
posals is accepted by an organization.

It 1s assumed that the discourse evolves continually. New standards are attended
to, others become uninteresting and disappear from the agenda. A basic mechanism
behind changes in attention may be a focus on novelty: when no further descrip-

versy may change over tim

— ——— i — —

———

anew ——— Gi ee


STANDARDIZATION AND FASHION TRENDS 163

Hons and arguments can be added to the discourse, there is not much left to discuss

and attention can be directed towards a new standard which has not yet been
described in such detail and for which there still are new argurnents

Some standards move from commanding general agreement to becoming highly
controversial, others move in the opposite direction or retain a fairly stable element
of controversy. Finally, some standards even become generally regarded as bad.
The discourse can move towards greater specification: that is, abstract principles are
given a more detailed, concrete content; problems are given solutions, or concrete
cases are quoted in which principles are said to have been transformed into prac-
tice. Or the discourse may move towards more conflict, as counter-arguments are
proposed. These two tendencies may be interrelated as they are in the reform
processes IN individual organizations described above, so that more specification

produces more controversy. Specification and controversy may be replaced by new
abstract ideas or by compromise, and perhaps by abstraction again.

Model dynamics

The cropping-up model is thus based on specific assumptions about organizational
forms, local reforms, and a general discourse. Organizational forms are ways of talk-
ing about organizations. Reforms, the presentation of new forms and attempts at
implementing them, have to be adapted to the rules for talking about organizations,
and particularly to talking about organizational intentions. Some of these rules are
provided by a general and continually evolving discourse about organizational
forms, containing standards for such forms. Since the reforms are adapted to rules
for talk and intentions they are attractive and are difficult to stop. Reforms are eas-
ily started. But due to this very connection with talk and discourse, reforms are apt
to lead to disappointment when it comes to implementation: what is considered
good talk does not necessarily correspond to good or even possible local practice.
Moreover, what is good generally may not be good for the individual organization.
The result of all this is that standards after a while tend to come into disrepute and
new reforms containing new standards are initiated. We get recurring reforms in a
continually evolving discourse.

There is thus a certain dynamic. At any one moment we have a set of organiza-
tions ripe for reform, namely, organizations which have gone so far in implement-
ing previously popular forms as to create frustration and an interest in new forms.
At every such moment all these organizations are exposed to the same discourse,
with its specific set of more or less controversial and more or less specific standards.

From the discourse it is possible to gather ideas about standard forms currently
attracting attention there, and to find arguments and support for them. Reform pro-
posals implying fairly uncontroversial forms will have the advantage over reform pro-
posals along other lines. The level of attention and of controversy affects not only the
organizations’ choice of forms, but also to some extent the area—organizational

structure, perhaps, or budget procedure—in which they reform, since not all areas

are necessarily being attended to or sparking uncontroversial ideas at every point 1n


FE BE nil LE

164 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

time. Since the discourse IS continually evolving—ct eating per Con.
troversies, and new specifications—the set of pi ss 5 var Or reform
during the next period will not introduce the same set oO! ae vin ree a SPe-
cific organization tries to implement depends on when 108 gins. And when

| has come.
a reform begins depends on how far the previous reform pe
Processes such as these could explain both uniformity ty between

organizations. The explanation refers to no attributes of the individual organization

apart from the timing of its reform cycles. Organizational reforms are similar in
organizations reforming at the same time, and different in organizations reformed

at different times. | > diff |

If the implementation process differs somewhat in length in different organiza-
tions, perhaps due to some random external variables, organizations which have
embarked on a certain reform simultaneously will not be ripe for a new reform at
quite the same time. It is then slightly less likely that these organizations will choose
the same reform as the others in the second round. This makes for variation over
time as regards the organizations which any specific organization is likely to resem-
ble. In other words it impedes any order among organizations on a cohort basis,

and confirms a picture of great variability and randomness. |
The model explains how popular standards in the general discourse are translated

into local organizational forms. It also demonstrates why fashion does not always
produce much uniformity; why fashionable standards are not necessarily reflected

in the forms of very many organizations: the standards are adopted only by organi-
zations which happen to be ripe for reform during the period when these standards

are popular.

Processes producing uniformity

The processes whereby ideas are translated from the general discourse to local
organizational forms should also be specified. The process we have described so far
is one of following standards. But another possible process involves innovation,
whereby a form is constructed locally. As mentioned above, sometimes there are
ideas in the discourse which are much attended to and uncontroversial, but which
also are fairly abstract and do not define any particular forms: they consist of slo-
gans or problems rather than very specific standards. Then the individual organiza-
tion has to invent its own forms. But even if the ideas are abstract, they may be
specific enough to make most reformers in most organizations come to very simi-
lar conclusions regarding what form to introduce. The forms are invented locally,
but are still very similar. There is a parallel here with certain inventions and dis-
coverles in science: oxygen, for example, was discovered by at least two scientists
simultaneously (Kuhn 1962). Similarities arising from innovation are particularly
likely when there is a strong consensus about what problems are important, but no
agreement on specific solutions.

Strictly speaking, local inventions of organizational forms are not examples of
standard adoption, but they they may give rise to standards. Organization members


STANDARDIZATION AND FASHION TRENDS 165

may well see their own invented form as something unique at first, only to learn
later that it 15 in fact quite common. In this case they may perceive themselves as
the first to introduce it, and perhaps develop a theory about how they have influ-
enced other organizations. The forms are presented as standards in the discourse.

These standards have evolved from below, from the group of adopters rather than
from professional standardizers.

The purchaser-provider standard that was popular in Swedish local governments
in the middle of the 1990s seems to have evolved in this way. Early, many agreed
that an important problem was that the politicians tended to represent the employ-
ees in the public sector rather than their constituencies. This problem made several
local governments and consultants invent and implement the purchaser-provider

form (Fernler 1996), and this form then became a fashionable standard stimulating
even more local governments to introduce the form.

Dissemination of forms

Given the processes described above, the number of organizations using a particu-
lar form will depend mainly on the length of time during which the correspond-

ing general idea, standard, or problem is comparatively important and
uncontroversial in the discourse. The longer a standard or problem is considered to

be the right one in the discourse or the greater the frequency of its being so con-
sidered, the greater will be the number of organizations which will have embarked
upon a reform period during this particular discourse, and the greater the number
which will have adopted the standard form or invented similar forms. In this way
(length of) time translates into (width of) space.

The compass of a particular form also depends on whether or not competing
standards or problems appear. If new standards do compete, the old ones are likely
to be questioned and ultimately likely to be erased. For instance, an old principle
for structuring the whole organization cannot normally be retained when a new
such principle is installed. It is hard to be basically centralized and basically decen-
tralized. When the competitive aspect is weaker, an old standard can be retained
together with new ones, so long as it does not fall into disrepute for other reasons.

A form becomes very common if the standard recommending this form is attrac-
tive and remains uncontroversial for a long time, and if competitive standards do
not appear for a considerable time after the standard giving rise to the reform has
faded away in the discourse. Budgeting can provide a relevant example here. As
mentioned in Chapter 1, it became popular for use in the private sector in the mid-
dle of the twentieth century, and generated a great deal of literature over a long
period. Many companies started using budgets. Even if this technique did not quite
deliver what it promised, disappointed users did not meet competing standards but
rather standards that were possible to combine with continued budgeting. Thus
most organizations still present budgets, although budgeting is no longer receiving
much attention in the discourse. Budgeting has even become highly institutional-
‘zed and almost a constitutive norm of modern organizations; having formed the


a a ERT "JE > EE ee

——_— a a A a a A PS ee ez Sw ee ee ee > Gregg 0 Ppgpen
Å - - — p
- = 2 = å :

wet.

i

166 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

4 manv organizations, budget;
basis for special departments or other structures in many OTS, , budgeting

| ioned in the discourse—
is now taken for granted and could not be easily (Wallander å
such questioning would not affect organizations very 1 )

konsil ; lopment talks’ with the;
Similarly, organizations may maintain that they hold develop eir

‘ali sed tor
employees long after everybody except a few specialists have er oe the
technique as important. In this way standards which may once pp quite

suddenly can give rise to stable norms and sedimental Pa mg CO exist
although they are no longer paid much attention (Danielsson .

Cropping up explained

The cropping-up model is not intended for use 1n explaining all uniformity Or
diversity in organizational forms, nor for explaining all fashion trends. But it can
provide a possible or partial explanation of the more or less simultaneous appear-
ance of similar forms among many, although far from all, organizations which do
not necessarily have any contact with each other. And when we use this model for
explaining uniformity and diversity, we do not need to know any specific charac-
teristics of any individual organizations apart from their position in the reform
cycle. Further, the model can explain situations when the reform processes involve
the adoption of standards as well as when they involve innovation.

Interaction between reforms and standards

In the cropping-up model it is assumed that the general discourse affects local
reforms. But in reality influence may also work in the opposite direction. Local
reforms may influence organizational discourse; experience of local reforms may be
generally discussed. Local organizations may in fact reinforce the popularity of cer-
tain forms, by reporting their own reforms and proclaiming their success,
Organizations which are or have been under reform become standardizers.

But local reforms in line with fashionable standards may also introduce contro-
versy about a particular standard, or even engender agreement on its negative
aspects. The standard may then become unfashionable, leaving room for new stan-
dards. As in the individual organizations, attempts at implementing reform may
make general principles seem less attractive. There may be several reasons for this.

First, reforms can lead the discourse and its standards towards a higher level of
specification. As has been noted, local reform generally calls for a more specified
version of a general standard, or a general problem must be met by a specific stan-
dard. The specifications may vary from one organization to another; if these dif-
ferent specifications appear in the general discourse, there will be a higher risk of
controversy than before. Different people may advocate different specifications,
which can reduce confidence in any specifications. But this process depends on the
way the specifications are reported back in the general discourse. The more gen-
eral the terms in which they are described, the less impact they have on the dis-
course. If the discourse is dominated by top managers or their assistants, who


STANDARDIZATION AND FASHION TRENDS 167

POSSESS little detailed information, or by consultants or researchers skilled in gener-
alization, then the reports are likely to be highly general and controversy is less
likely than if the discourse is joined by people who possess more detailed informa-
tion and who are less prone to generalize.

Secondly, information about local attempts at implementing reform can be
expected to produce a more mixed discourse on implementation and results.
Without empirical evidence, agreement on any particular standard is based on the
beauty of its principles, the expectation of its relatively easy implementation, and
its positive results. If empirical observations are included in the discussions, there is
a greater risk that information about difficulties and negative results will emerge,
thus producing a less favourable picture which may then increase controversy and
produce many arguments against that particular standard. Difficulties in implemen-
tation can be expected to be more threatening than negative results. Assessments of
results tend to be more ambiguous, and hence less obviously negative. On the other
hand in periods of general decline and difficulty, ambiguity about the results of
reform may turn reforms into scapegoats, thereby producing agreement on how
‘bad’ are the standards on which they are based, thus making room for new ideas.

Thirdly, reforms in the same direction in a large number of organizations may
change perceptions of the standard in question among organizational actors and in
the discourse. When the news spreads that this standard is being implemented in
many organizations of different kinds, the innovation process is no longer possible,
and the ways in which the standard can be introduced become limited. What is
more, the standard may now come to be perceived in some cases as a ‘fashion’
rather than a rational solution; its adoption may be criticized as an instance of imi-
tation and passive following of fashion, which is difficult to combine with the nor-
mal conception of the organization and its management as rational problem-solvers
(Abrahamson 1996b). It is also difficult to combine following fashions with the
basic idea that organizations should have strong identities of their own, with par-
ticular or even unique characteristics and tasks. Seeing a standard as a fashion may
involve negative arguments in the discourse, making 1t more difficult to implement
that standard locally.

These mechanisms do not always work: in some cases the high frequency of an
organizational form has the opposite effect of reinforcing agreement that it is a good
one. On the other hand, it is not likely that attention will be paid to such a form
in the discourse for much longer.

Fourthly, the discourse may be affected by an active local demand for new forms.
After some time there will be a number of organizations which have failed in the
implementation of a specific reform, or which have recognized the absence of
results and which therefore enter upon a phase of new reform. Previous reforms
have made organizations immune to the standard in question. It will be difficult for
the reformers to produce the same reform again, so they will look for another stan-

dard in order to be able to launch a new reform.
In most of these cases local reforms help to create new standards. This in turn

provides a basis for new reforms, which in turn tends to change the discourse again,


- p—— ts

-—— ==  — ee ee a ee ee ee ee

— —— — — > - -

«
Å

- r Lg
=o Mg hk ner

168 A WORLD OF STANDARDS
å

| r, the sys
ind so on. If the factors described above are all strong ; ystem as a whole
c " . p å . å ON ‘ » an '
becomes very dynamic and highly diversified: the SEERE Cha så pr Breat rate
| zations only. |
and individual forms are therefore adopted by few organ! Y- Lhe fashions

give rise to diversity rather than uniformity.

The range of applicability

The cropping-up model is only one of several possible models, ve can be used
to describe and explain fashion trends of the ee cece is type. It appears useful
when it comes to explaining uniformity and diversity 1n organ! zational forms. But
it may also be a good explanatory model in other contexts. For instance, there are
probably cropping-up processes also among individuals. But if the model is to be
applicable, its basic premises must be valid as well. = rd

First, the model presupposes a mechanism for variation over time in regard to
popular standards. The cause behind such shifts in fashion can vary, but the impor-
tant thing is that they are there. Secondly, it must be easy for the adopters to assim-
ilate the new standards. This may, for example, be because many standards have
positive effects or, as is the case with organizational forms, because the effects are
uncertain and the adopters are easy to convince. It may also be because the adopters
value compliance with fashion. Thirdly, the adopters must be open to the standards
only at predetermined time intervals. The time intervals must be longer than the
intervals between fashions.

These prerequisites can be applicable in many circumstances. In others, they are
not. Sometimes the first premise about fashion does not apply: democracy has, for
example, for a long time dominated as a standard for government, in the same Way
that the standard for screw threads has been the same for a long time. Sometimes
the second premise is not applicable: the principle of the assembly line in manu-
facturing may possibly be said to have enjoyed varying degrees of popularity at dif-
ferent times, but there are certain operations that are better suited to assembly line
processes than others. This has created a fairly constant difference between, for
example, car manufacturing and many service industries. The third premise regard-
Ing inertia in acceptance is not applicable to clothes fashions in the West, and,
therefore, these fashions tend to create variation over time rather than variation in
space. The cropping-up model may apply to clothes fashions in fashion-conscious
countries in the Third World, however: if people are poor they cannot buy clothes
very often and will wear the clothes that were in fashion at the time they could
afford them. The result will be a diversity in space, that is, a much more varied
street scene than in fashion-conscious rich countries. A similar diversity between

very modern and very antiquated techniques can be seen in many Third World
countries in the agricultural and industrial sectors.


12

The Pros and Cons of Standardization—
An Epilogue

Nits BRUNSSON AND BENGT JACOBSSON

Standards are attractive. And, as we have seen in the previous chapters, there is no
lack of standardizers in the world. There are plenty of people who NT what is
best for everyone else, often claiming their own experthood. A lot of standardiza-
tion goes on, but how should it be evaluated? Is standardization useful or even
essential, or is it harmful and unnecessary? Will all this standardization lead to too
much conformity, or is it a way to achieve co-ordination in situations where other
rules are less likely to work? Let us first look at what standardizers say themselves.

Why standards?

Standards and standardization tend to be justified on much the same grounds as
rules and regulation in general. One argument is that, just like other rules, standards
represent an effective way of transmitting information. If we know that someone
is complying with a standard with which we ourselves are familiar, this provides us
with a good deal of information, obviating the need to ask questions in every indi-
vidual case. Alternatively, we may not know very much about the content of a
standard, but simply assume that it is desirable. The amount of information we need
is then even less than in the first case. If we know that a ship has been classified as

ttre LA AE TT

conforming to certain safety standards, we are perfectly happy to sail on it, often
without knowing anything about the exact content of. the standards concerned. If
we know that a company is certified according to the ISO standard 14001 for envi-
ronmental management systems, we are supposed to know that its production is as

environmentally sound as possible. If the information-conveying role of a standard

is to be fulfilled, it is often necessary that a third party should certify that the stan-
dard is being followed. We even tend to have more faith in the certifier than in the

ae er

certified—more in the ship-classifying organization than in the shipowner.

- Another argument in favour of using standards is that they have an important co-
ordinating function. Standards are often created with a view to making certain
productsmiutually compatible,\so that a plug will fit into a socket, for example. The

actions of different actors can also be co-ordinated: if we know that another per-
particular standard, it is easier for us to adjust our actions

son is complying with a


170 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

| information needed. K :
accordingly. Again this can reduce the amount of in nowing

that the standard exists, and that the other party accep it, 1S SU a there iS no
need for the two sides to discuss the details of their actions or products with each

other. Often, in fact, we will simply have expected that the other peer IS going
to comply with the standard, which allows us to adjust our action to those of the

other party beforehand. Again we recognize the advantages of ee In general
Standards also result in simplification. They reduce the number of Possibilities

we have to consider. This can make it easier to get information and to co-ordinate
actions. It can also be of value in itself: a chaotic world pecouses more ordered,
making it easier to orientate ourselves and to understand how things are . This js
indicated in official definitions of standards as aiming at the achievement of the
‘optimum degree of order’ (see Chapter 1). |

Standards are also often drawn up on the grounds that they provide the best solu-
tion to a problem (or at least a very good solution), perhaps by indicating the form
of organization that is most effective or most democratic, or the telephone techno-
logy that is best. The implication is that there is no reason not to adhere to the stan-
dard, since it is the best to be had. A great many standardizers rely almost
exclusively on such arguments, not least all the INGOs that want to improve the
world, or the management experts who know ‘best’ how to improve organizations
The ‘best possible solution’ argument is also used with the other arguments men.
tioned above. For instance, there may be several standards that would promote co-
ordination, but why not choose the one that provides the best solution?

The argument that standards have a strong tendency to make everyone alike is
one that standardizers rarely use. Instead, they tend to emphasize that using stan-
dards can actually favour variation. In the computer industry, for instance, it js
argued that agreement on certain standards makes it easier to direct efforts at find-
ing new and innovative solutions to problems for which no standards as yet exist.
In the same vein many management books offer standards for ways in which com-
panies should improve their competitiveness—standards that are obviously
intended to increase variation, although this may be difficult to achieve if many
companies all decide to follow the standards.

Another argument, rather similar to the one about standardization producing
sumilarity, is that standardization brings advantages in the shape of large-scale pro-
duction. This was an argument that flourished in the early days of product stan-

prerequisite of industrialization. Using standardized sizes for clothing, for example,
makes things much easier for the clothing industry, just as the adoption of standard
dimensions for bolts is of great benefit to the engineering industry.

All of these arguments—about the more effective use of information, better
co-ordination of activities, simplification, and the advantages of large-scale
production—can be used to show that a certain amount of international standard-
ization is good for international trade and thus for the achievement of prosperity

generally. This is certainly one of the main reasons why standardization issues enjoy
such high priority in the European Union.


THE PROS AND CONS OF STANDARDIZATION 171

As we discussed at the beginning of this book, standards may be especially attrac-
ive since they offer some order in a potentially chaotic world. Standards are often
regarded as highly legitimate rules, even if they are produced by experts who are
somewhat divorced from any democratic procedures. Standards and standardiza-
jon make it possible to achieve co-ordination without a legal centre of authority
(that 18, å nation-state or a world state). Such tendencies could be seen in the EU,
with its increasing use of product standards and ‘soft law’ as a means to further inte-

gration, Standardization 1s considered an attractive way of bringing about necessary
regulation, avoiding both market solutions and the intervention of states.

Arguments against standards and standardization

If people are to believe what the standardizers say, they must be convinced that
standards do have all sorts of positive effects. All the same, these effects can be—
and indeed have been—questioned on several counts. One might wonder whether
the goals ascribed to standardization are desirable, whether standardization does
lead to the realization of these goals, and whether there might not be better ways
of achieving the goals than by standardization.

Many of the objections to standards and standardization are similar to the objec-
tions to rules and regulation in general. Standardization is often seen as an unwel-
come, unnecessary, and harmful intrusion into a world of free, distinct individuals
and organizations who are wise enough to decide for themselves, or into the world
of civil society or free markets. Standardization, it is felt, will mean regulation from
outside, whereby actors, things, and conditions are now to be shaped in a uniform
manner.

Becoming more alike is often seen as something undesirable, with many present-
day actors—organizations or individuals—preferring to be different from one
another rather than alike. As described in other chapters, a high degree of similar-
ity produced by standards runs up against theories and conceptions that such actors
have about their autonomy and their distinctiveness: states feel they should be
steered democratically by their own people, companies that they should be steered
by innovation, and individuals that they should be driven by their striving for self-
realization—and all of them thus feeling that they should be different.

Standards are also criticized for going too far in stabilizing the world. If every-
one does the same thing, what room 1s there for innovation? If all companies or
states are organized in the same way, how can they learn better ways from each
other? If all the technical details of a telephone are standardized except for the outer
form, will we have anything to expect apart from endless variations in superficial
details—telephones looking like bananas, teddy bears, Mickey Mouse, or what-
ever—without any fundamental innovations in their technical functioning, their

—

quality, or their effectiveness?
Also, can we trust the expertise and goodwill of those who set the rules? How

can we know that the standardizers know best what is right for us? If large inter-
national corporations play a leading role in standardization, how can we know that


GJE PJ Eige gi a

er

nn» A ARIE > —

— == — oe

172 A WORLD OF STANDARDS

their solutions are best for their consumers or employees, rather than simply for the
managers or technicians involved or for the company $s shareholders? Similarly, jp
the case of standardizers who develop standards to be used exclusively by others,
how can we determine that their standards are really good for us? If the know-alls
in the business field who tell others how large corporations should be managed.
were as good as they imply they are, why aren't they doing it themselves?

It is easy to find examples of standardization leading to poor solutions, Particu-
larly in the case of product standardization. In terms of safety, for instance, traffic
lights based on the red-green colour combination are not a particularly gooq
choice, since these two colours are specially difficult for the colour-blind to distin-

guish. Or again, a standard height of 440 mm. above ground level for car bumpers
may be good for cars, but it is less desirable for human beings since this is the aver-

age height above the ground of people’s kneecaps. The_order of letters on a key.
board, qwerty, which became standard for keyboards is yet another example. The

order was originally devised to reduce typing speeds, which was an important con-

poet — Oe I tit Ye Et VA le

sideration at the time in order to.prevent.the typebars from jamming (David 1986).

Although the problem no longer exists, the standard is still with us. We fear that
many standards as bad as this still lurk in other areas, although they may be more

difficult to demonstrate.
Many critics of regulation and standardization prefer markets to standards. Why

not let the market decide how products and services should be designed? Buyers
can determine this through the purchases they choose to make. Sometimes, how-
ever, 1t may be the critics of regulation who support standardization, seeing it as a
promise of greater freedom and less uniformity in areas that have previously been
heavily controlled by directives. If the choice is between national law and stan-
dards, or between binding international agreements and standards, many critics of
regulation can be expected to prefer standards.

But standardization can also be criticized from the opposite angle, as represent-
ing too weak a form of regulation, for its weak links with formal organization, and
for its inferiority compared with directives. Critics who take this approach may call
for more formal organization. They regard standardization as being too important
to world development to be relegated to a bunch of private organizations whose
status 1s unclear and whose democratic roots are weak. Critics of this kind can be
expected to call for a return to strong nation-states, perhaps some form of world
state, or at least for more state intervention. They would argue that it is better to

let a democratically elected body than a private organization determine our rules.

Standardization and the procrustean heritage

We have no answer to the question of whether we need more or less standardiza-
tion. Whatever line one opts for, some convincing arguments are always available.
Standardization deserves to be paid a good deal more attention than it has received
up to now. As we noted in Chapter 3, standards are very much a reflection of a
modern world that began to emerge as long ago as Descartes, a world informed


THE PROS
E PROS AND CONS OF STANDARDIZATION 173

_ or  beliet i “ne : |
with a strong belie fin general, abstract, and timeless ideas. in experts and the k
> as, Aperts and the Know-

ledge possessed by experts. Going even further back in h;
hing to learn from the old Greek myths. story, we may have some-

Ina ined standardizing is the art of constructing a procrustean bed. Procrustes
was a legendary bandit in Greek mythology, a bandit wl or -

ecially constructed bed. The bed | nt: » vee ah ie OF
sp ) | | Was a pattern and a yardstick intended to creat
conformity. Any captive who was not tall enough was stretched until h i ;
the savn vier those who were taller than the bed was long had riers sii
truding limbs lopped off. Procrustes . i
should look like, and in that sense he ve y lik bnr ass ape ge
have called ‘standardizers’ in this book. EE EE

There are differences between modern standardizers and this legendary bandit.
Modern standardizers are often active in a large—sometimes a global—market
where they have to compete against other standardizers. The marauding that
occurred in the Theseus myth, to which Procrustes belongs, was limited in regional
terms. The standardization imposed in this Greek legend demanded that someone
either sought out the bandit or just happened to pass by where he lay in wait, as
Theseus did on his way to Athens. This is not the case today, when modern stan-
dardizers instead take active steps to disseminate their rules.

The procrustean bed was not made to measure for its own creator. The standard
was meant to be imposed not on him but on others. This proved fatal to Procrustes
in his meeting with Theseus, who impudently decided to test the standard on the
bandit himself. Nor is it unusual for modern standardizers to exclude themselves
fom the rules that they produce and distribute to others.

In modern societies, procrustean beds are everywhere. Standardizers jostle with
one another as they compete for supremacy. As we saw In the earlier chapters 1n
this book, standardizers come in a variety of guises: as management gurus, consul-
tants, academic researchers, organizations formed with the purpose of information
exchange, standard-based organizations, or international governmental or non-
governmental organizations. All these individuals or organizations produce rules
intended for others. The whole subject of standards—their production, distribu-
tion, and adoption—is of central importance in society today and should also be so

in the social sciences.


Bibliography

ABBOTT, Å., 1988, The System of Professions. An Essa
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ABRAHAMSON, E., 19964, Management Fashion. A
Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 254—285.

— 1996b, "Technical and Aesthetic Fashion’

| grip , In Czarniawska, B., and Sevön, G.
(eds.), Translating Organizational Change. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

AHRNE, G., 1994, Social Organizations. London: Sage.

AQS-O No. 20-77 (Förslag till ISO från DIN , 1977).

ARGYRIS, C., and SCHÖN, D., 1978, Theory in Practice. San Fransisco: Jossey-Bass.
ARISTOTLE (384—322 Bc), 1985, Nicomachean Ethics. Indianapolis: Hackett.

BARLEY, S., and KUNDA, G., 1992. Design and Devotion: Surges of Rational and

Normative Ideologies of Control in Managerial Discourse’, Administrative Science
Quarterly, Vol. 37, pp. 363-99.

BARNARD, C., 1938, The Functions of the Executive. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

BERGER, P., and LUCKMANN, T., 1966, The Social Construction of Reality. New York:
Doubleday.

BODDEWYN, J. J., 1983, ‘Advertising self-regulation: Organization Structures in
Belgium, Canada, France, Sweden and the United Kingdom’. Working paper

presented at the 6th EGOS Colloquium, ‘Beyond Bureaucracy’, Florence, 3-5
November.

Boston, J., MARTIN, J., PALLOT, J., and Watsu, P. (eds.), 1996, Public Management:
The New Zealand Model. Auckland: Oxford University Press.

Brief notes—1 meeting, ISO/TC176 QA (Notes TC 176, Ottawa, 1980).

Brunsson, K., 1995, Dubbla budskap. Hur riksdagen och regeringen presenterar sitt bud-
getarbete. Stockholm: Stockholm University.

Brunsson, N., 1985, The Irrational Organization: Irrationality as a Basis for
Organizational Action and Change. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.

1989, The Organization of Hypocrisy—Talk, Decisions and Actions in

Organizations. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.

1995, ‘Ideas and Action, Justification and Hypocrisy as Alternatives to

Control’, Research in the Sociology of Organizations, Vol. 13, pp. 211-35.

1996, ‘Institutionalized Beliefs and Practices. The Case of Markets and

Organizations’, Score Working Paper 1996: 6.

FORSSELL, A., and WINBERG, H., 1989, Reform som tradition, Administrativa

reformer i Statens Jårnvågar. Stockholm: EFI.
and JÖNSSON, S., 1978, Beslut och handling. Om politikers inflytande på politiken.

y on the Division of Expert Labor.

cademy of Management Review,

Stockholm: Liber.


BIBLIOGRAPHY
176
997, The Reforming Organization Be
by Routledge, 1993.)
s. Oslo: Fagbokforlaget.

)
BRUNSSON, N., and OLSEN, J. sr ha 7
Fagbokforlaget. (Previously pu lish
t 1998, Organizing Organizations. L ene
| and SAHLIN-ANDERSSON, K., forthcoming, ‘Constructing Organizations, -

:xample of public sector reform , Organization Studies. |
| examp T.. 1997, The Europeanization of Standardization Technica

I Governance in Europe. Copenhagen: Copenhagen

BUNDGARD-PEDERSEN,
Standards and Multi Leve

apse 1951/1991, ‘Executive Behaviour. Reprinted with Contribut; oka

by Henry Mintzberg and Rosemary Stewart’, Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis
Studia Qeconomiae Negotiorum, No. 32. Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksel]
International. | |

| Curunc, A., 1996, ‘Understanding Public Sector Reforms: Their globalness

diversity, and changes 1n values and institutional relationships’. Paper Presented
at the Third International Conference of Administrative Sciences, Beijing, 8-11

October. |
CHRISTENSEN, T., and LÆGREID, P., 1998, Den moderne forvaltning. Oslo: Tano

Aschehoug.
Couen, M., Marcu, J., and OLSEN, J., 1972, 'A Garbage Can Model of
Organizational Choice’, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 1, pp. 1-25.
COLEMAN, J., 1990, Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
CZARNIAWSKA, B., and JOERGES, B., 1996, “Travels of Ideas’, in Czarniawska, B.
and Sevon, G. (eds.), Translating Organizational Change. Berlin: de Gruyter.
SEVON, G. (eds.), 1996, Translating Organizational Change. Berlin: de Gruyter,
DANIELSSON, A., 1983, Företagsekonomi—en översikt. Lund: Studentlitteratur.

(Dyr, P., 1986, “Understanding the Economics of QWERTY: The Necessity of

/ History’, in Parker, W. N., Economic History and the Modern Economist. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.

DiMaccio, P. J., and Power, W. W., 1983, ‘The Iron Cage Revisited:

Institutional Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields’,
American Sociological Review, Vol. 48, pp. 147—60.

Drucker, P. F., 1954, The Practice of Management. New York: Harper & Brothers.
DURKHEIM, E., 1906 (1974), ‘The Determination of Social Facts’, in Durkheim, E.,
Sociology and Philosophy. New York: Free Press, 1974.

EGEBERG, M., 1978, "Organisert politisk ulikhet”, in Olsen, J. P. (ed.), Politisk organ-

isering: organisasjonsteoretiske synspunkt på folkestyre og politisk ulikhet. Bergen:
Universitetsforlaget.

— - — ——_ —

Eras, N., 1939, Wandlungen des Verhaltens in den westlichen Oberschichten des
| Abendlandes
EN ISO 9000-1:1994, Kvalitetsstandarder—Del 1: Allmånna riktlinjer för val och

anvåndning. Stockholm: SIS.

EN ISO 2001:1994, Kvalitetssystem—Kvalitetssåkring vid konstruktion, utveckling, pro-
duktion, installation, leverans och underhåll av programvara. Stockholm: SIS.


BIBLIOGRAPHY
177

EN ISO 9004-1:1994, Kvalitetsledning och
riktlinjer. Stockholm SIS.

EvANS, P., 1995, Embedded Autonomy. States and
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

FELDMAN, M. +5 and MARCH, J. G., 1981, ‘Information in Organizations as Signal
and Symbol’, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 26, pp. 171-86

FERNLER, K., 1990, Mångfald eller likriktning . Effekter av en avreglering. Stockholm:
Nerenius & Santérus. ; |

FINNEMORE, M. G., 1992,
Stanford University Press.

kvalitetssystemelement—Del 1: Allmånna

Industrial Transformation.

Science, the State, and International Society. Stanford:

1996, National Interests in International Society. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.

FURUSTEN, S., 1999, Popular Management Books.
mean for organizations. London: Routledge.

and TAMM HALLSTRÖM, K., 1996, 'Standards and Standardization—on the
Production of Official and Unofficial Management Standards’. Paper presented

at EURAS 3rd annual conference, ‘Standards and Society’, Stockholm, 3—5 May.

GIDDENS, A., 1990, The Consequences of Modemity. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.

GREENWOOD, R., SUDDABY, R., and HIniNGs, C. R., 1998, "The Role of Professional
Associations in the Transformation of Institutionalized Fields’. Paper presented at
the Scancor workshop, ‘Samples of the future’, Scancor, Stanford, September.

GRINDLEY, P., 1995, Standards, Strategy and Policy. Cases and Stories. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

GUILLET DE MONTHOUX, P., 1981, Doktor Kant och den oekonomiska rationaliseringen.
Göteborg: Bokförlaget Korpen.

GULICK, L., and Urwick, L. (eds.), 1937, Papers in the Science of Administration. New
York: Institute of Public Administration, Columbia University.

Haas, E. B., 1990, When Knowledge is Power. Three Models of Change in International
Organizations. Berkeley: University of California Press.

HÄGG, I., and JOHANSON, J. (eds.), 1982, Företag 1 Nåtverk—ny syn på konkurrenskraft.
Stockholm: SNS.

HAKANSSON, H., 1987, Industrial Technological Development: A Network Approach.
London: Croom Helm.

(ed.), 1982, International Marketing and Purchasing of Industrial Goods. New
York: John Wiley & Sons. | |

HARRISON, R. J., and MUNGALL, S., 1990, ‘Harmonisation’, in Groom, A. J. R., and
Taylor, P., 1990, Frameworks for International Co-operation. London: Pinter
Publishers.

HAWKINS, R., MANSELL, R., and SKEA, J. (eds.), 1995, Standards, Innovation and
Competitiveness. The Politics and Economics of Standards in Natural and Technical

Environments. Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
HERNES, G. (ed.), 1978, Forhandlingsøkonomi og blandingsadministrasjon. Oslo:

Universitetsforlaget.

How they are made and what they


| Hirscuman. A.. 1972, Sorti eller protest. En fraga om lojaliteter. Stockholm: Rabén &

Sjögren.

| Hirst, P., and THOMPSON,
Press.

| HoBsBawM, E., and Rancer, I. (eds.),

idge: bridge University Press. | | Meade

å lena ublic management for all seasons’, Public Administration, Vo}.
69, pp. 3-19. | Sih

| 1995 ‘The New Public Management in the 1980s: Variations on a theme’,

Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 20, No. 2/3, pp. 93-109.

and Jackson, M., 1991, Administrative Argument. Aldershot: Dartmouth.

HUGEMARK, A., 1994, Den fingslande marknaden. Ekonomiska experter om
vålfårdsstaten. Lund: Arkav.

G.. 1996, Globalization in Question. Cambridge: Polity

1992, The Invention of Tradition

Hucues, T. P., 1987, ‘The Evolution of Large Technological Systems’, in Biker,
W E., Hughes, T. P., and Pinch, T. J. (eds.), The Social Construction of
Technological Systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Hypén, H., 1997, ‘Ritten som standardiserad politik. Fran ‘frusen’ politik till
upptinade relationer’. Paper presented at a conference in Elfvik, March.

ISO/IEC Directives—Part 1: Procedures, 1992.

ISO/IEC Directives—Part 1: Procedures, 1995.

ISO/TC176/N242 (Draft of ‘Vision, Mission, and Key Strategies’, November 1995).

ISO/TC176/SC2/SC2CG/N-30 (QA/QM first interim report), 1995.

ISO/TC176/SC2/N298 (Internal strategy document from TC 176, named
QA/QM report’), 1995.

ISO/TC176/SPAG/N66 (SPAG report), 1995.

ISO/TC176/SC2/N331.

JACOBSSON, B., 1984, Hur styrs förvaltningen? Myt och verklighet kring departementens
styrning av åmbetsverken. Lund: Studentlitteratur.

1989, Konsten att reagera. Intressen, institutioner och nåringspolitik. Stockholm:
Carlssons.

1993, ‘Europeiseringen av förvaltningen”, Statsvetenskaplig Tidskrift, Vol. 96,

— — -——— a-- eee —_

No. 2, pp. 113-37.

1997, Europa och staten. Europeiseringens betydelse för svensk statsförvaltning.
Report to Förvaltningspolitiska kommissionen. SOU 1997: 30.

and SAHLIN-ANDERSSON, K., 1995, Skolan och det nya verket. Skildringar från
styrningens och utvårderingarnas tidevarv. Stockholm: Nerenius & Santérus.
JEPPERSON, R. L., 1991, "Institutions, Institutional Effects, and Institutionalization’,

in Powell, W. W., and DiMaggio, P. J. (eds.), The New Institutionalism in
Organizational Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

JOHANSON, J., and Associates, 1994. ‘Internationalization, Relationships and
Networks’, Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis. Studia

Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell International.

JOHANSSON, P., and JOHNSSON, M.., 1994, Ar kommunerna slavar under modetrendema?
Goteborg: Géteborg University, Förvaltningshögskolan.

Qeconomiae Negotiorum, No. 36.

9

BIBLIOGRAPHY 179

pe 1995, Kommunernas sökande i reformernas |
University, Förvaltningshögskolan. |

Jonson, K. M. C., 1994, The Evolution of the IS |
Information to CEN/BT/WG81 of O 9000 Standards. How it started.

Jos SEE, EE L., RUBenowrrz, S., and WESTERSTAHL, J., 1999, The
Decentralized City. Democracy, Efficiency, Service. Göteborg: BAS a |

KAPLAN, A., 1964, The C |
kn are Cl å onduct of Inquiry. Methodology for the Behavioral Sciences.

abyrint. Göteborg: Göteborg

KRASNER, 5., 1983, International Regimes. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

KUHN, T., 1962, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Kvalitet och Förnyelse, No. 1—4. Göteborg 1997.
Latour, B., 1986, “The Powers of Association’, in Law, J. (ed.), Power, Action and

Belief: A New Sociology of Knowledge. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
1987, Science in Action. Bristol: Open University Press.

Law, J., 1994, Organizing Modernity. Oxford: Blackwell.
LERDELL, D., and SAHLIN-ANDERSSON, K., 1997, Att låra över griinser. En studie av

OECDs förvaltningspolitiska samarbete. Report to Férvaltningspolitiska kommis-
sionen. SOU 1997: 33.

LILJEROS, F., 1996, Elitinnebandy. Skapandet av en elitidrott. Stockholm: Stockholm
University, Institute of Sociology.

LINDBLOM, C., 1958, “The Science of Muddling Through’, Public Administration
Review, Vol. 19, pp. 79-88.

Loya, T., and Bout, J. (eds.), 1998, Constructing World Culture. International Non-
governmental Organizations since 1875. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

McGreoor, D., 1960, The Human Side of Enterprise. New York: McGraw-Hill.

MALINOWSKI, B., 1927, “The Life of Culture’, in Smith, G. E., Malinowski, B.,
Spinden, H., and Goldenweiser, A., Culture. The Diffusion Controversy. New

York: W. W. Norton.
Marcu, J. G., 1981, ‘Footnotes to Organizational Change’, Administrative Science

Quarterly, Vol. 26, pp. 563-77.
and OLSEN, J. P., 1989, Rediscovering Institutions: The Organizational Basis of

Politics. New York: Free Press.

and Simon, H., 1958, Organizations. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

MarkovITs, A., 1988, ‘The Other American Exceptionalism—Why Is There
No Soccer in the United States?’, Praxis International, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 125-

50.
MARQUARDT, D., Chové, J., JENSEN, K. E., PETRICK, K., PYLE, J., and STRAHLE, D.,

1991. ‘Vision 2000: The Strategy for the ISO 9000 Series Standards in the 90s’,

Quality Progress, May 1991, pp. 25-31.
Marx, G., 1959, Groucho and Me. London: Columbus Books.
MENDEL, P., 1996, ‘The Institutional Development of Global Production: the Case


180 BIBLIOGRAPHY

of ISO 9000 International Management Standards’. Paper presented at EURAS

3rd annual conference Stockholm, 3-5 May. | | dr
Meyer, J. W., 1987, ‘The World Polity and the Authority of the Nation-State’, in

Thomas, G. M., Meyer, J. W Ramirez, F. O., and Boli, J., Institutional Structure:
» J. og 9 få o9 hå , | ¢ |
Constituting State, Society, and the Individual. Newbury Park, CA: Sage

| JER ., and Meyer, J. W.
1994, ‘Rationalized Environments , 11 te W. R,, : de / ke W.,
Institutional Environments and Organizations: Structura omplexity and

Individualism. London: Sage.

1996, ‘Otherhood: The Promulgation and Transmission of Ideas in the

Modern Organizational Environment’, 1n Czarniawska, B., and Sevon, G. (eds.),

Translating Organizational Change. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
1997, ‘Cultural Conditions of Standardization’. Paper presented at a SCAN-

COR/SCORE seminar on standardizing, Arild, 18-20 September.
and JePPERSON, R. L., 1996, "The Actors of Modern Society: Cultural

Rationalization and the Ongoing Expansion of Social Agency’. Paper presented
at the conference Institutional Analysis, the University of Arizona, March.

and Rowan, B., 1977, ‘Institutionalized Organizations: Formal Structure as
Myth and Ceremony’, American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 83, pp. 364-85.

and ScoTT, R., 1983, ‘Centralization and the Legitimacy Problems of Local
Government’, in Meyer, J. W., and Scott, W. R., Organizational Environments,

Ritual and Rationality. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Bout, J., and Tuomas, G., 1987, ‘Ontology and Rationalization in the

Western Cultural Account’, in Thomas, G. M., Meyer, J. W., Ramirez, F. O.,
and Boli, J., Institutional Structure: Constituting State, Society, and the Individual.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

MILLER, P., 1999, ‘Governing the Enterprise: The Hidden Face of Accounting’,
in Porter, T., and Ross, D. (eds.), The Cambridge History of Science, Vol. 7:
Modern Social and Behavioural Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

MINTZBERG, H., 1973, The Nature of Managerial Work. New York: Harper & Row.

1978, “Patterns in Strategy Formation’, Management Science, Vol. 24, pp.

934-48.

1991, “Managerial Work: Forty Years Later’, in Carlson, S., ‘Executive
Behaviour. Reprinted with contributions by Henry Mintzberg and Rosemary
Stewart’, Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis. Studia Oeconomiae Negotiorum, No. 32, pp.
97-111. Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell International.

MÖRTH, U., 1996, Vardagsintegration—la vie quotidienne—i Europa: Sverige |
EUREKA och EUREKA i Sverige. Stockholm: SU Stockholm Studies in Politics
No. 54.

NORMANN, R., 1975, Skapande foretagsledning. Lund: Aldus.

OLSEN, J. P., and Perers, B. G., 1996, Lessons From Experience: Experiental Learning

in Administrative Reforms in Eight Democracies. Oslo: Scandinavian University
Press.

OLSON, O., GUTHRIE, J., and Humpnrey, C., 1998, Global Warning, Debating


BIBLIOGRAPHY 18
|

Imtermational Developments in New
Akademisk Forlag.

NE, D., and GaAgB |
OsBOR rete LER, ty 1993, Reinventing Government—How the
Entrepreneurial Spirit is Transforming the Public Sector New York: PI
| : Plume.

=" -and PEASKREE, P., 1997, Banishing Bureaucracy—The Five Strategies for
Reinventing Government. New York: Addison-Wesley phe

Qucu, W. G., 1980, “Markets, Bureaucracies and Clans’
Quarterly, Vol. 25, pp. 129-41,

PARSONS, T., 1937, The Structure of Social Action. New York: McGraw-Hill.

PERSSON, L., 1992, “Konkurrens och makt”, in Brunsson, N., and Higg, I. (eds.)
Marknadens makt. Stockholm: SNS Förlag.

PETERS, T., and WATERMAN, R., 1982, In Search of Excellence. New York: Random
House.

PincH, T., and Biker, W. E., 1984, "The social construction of facts and artefacts:

or how the sociology of science and the sociology of technology might benefit
each other’, Social Studies of Science, Vol. 14, pp. 399—441.

PotuitT, C., 1993, Managerialism and the Public Services: Cuts or Cultural Change in
the 1990s? (2nd edition). Oxford: Blackwell.

Power, M., 1997, The Audit Society. Rituals of Verification. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. 3

PowELL, W. W., and DiMaccio, P. J. (eds.), 1991, The New Institutionalism in
Organizational Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

PUMA, 1995, Governance in Transition. Public Management Reforms in OECD
Countries. OECD.

ReeD, M. I., 1996, ‘Expert Power and Control in Late Modernity: An Empirical
Review and a Theoretical Synthesis’, Organization Studies, Vol. 17, pp. 573-97.

REICHARD, C., 1995, ‘New Steering Models as the German Variant of New Public
Management Concepts’. Paper presented at the EGPA conference in Rotterdam.

RHENMAN, E., 1969, Företaget och dess omvårld. Organisationsteori för langsiktsplanering.
Stockholm: Bonniers.

ROBERTSON, R., 1992, Globalization. Social Theory and Global Culture. London: Sage.

RomBACH, B., 1991, Det går inte att styra med mål! Lund: Studentlitteratur.

and SAHLIN-ANDERSSON, K., 1996, Från sanningssökande till styrmedel. Moderna

utvårderingar i offentlig sektor. Stockholm: Nerenius & Santérus.
Rovik, K.-A., 1993, De-institutionalization and the Fashion Mechanism. Tromso:

Public Financi
iblic Financial Management. Cappelen:

Administrative Science

University of Tromsø.
1996, ‘Deinstitutionalization and the Logic of Fashion’, in Czarniawska, B.,

and Sevön, G. (eds.), Translating Organizational Change. Berlin: de Gruyter.

1998, Moderne Organisasjoner. Bergen: Fagbokforlaget.
SAHLIN-ANDERSSON, K., 1996, ‘Imitating by Editing Success: The Construction of
Organizational Fields’, in Czarniawska, B., and Sevön, G. (eds.), Translating

Organizational Change. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
SASSEN, S., 1998, Globalization and its Discontents. Selected Essays. New York: New

Press.


a =

—F =

ak 998. Coordinating Technology. Studies in the
SCHMIDT, S., and Werte, R., 1776, [oor his |
( International Standardization of Telecommunications. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Scott, R., 1998, Organizations. Rational, Natural, and Open Systems (4th edition).
New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc. ee | PE
caine, a 1996 ‘Organizational Imitation 1n Identity Transformation , in
Centeta rakes B. and Sevön, G. (eds.), Translating Organizational Change. Berlin:
de Gruyter. 3 å |
SIKKA, P "and Wiumort, H., 1995, ‘The Power of Independence Defending
and Bixveriditil the Jurisdiction of Accounting in the United Kingdom’,
Accounting, Organizations and Society, Vol. 20, No. 6, pp. J4/-81.
SIQ, 1995, ‘Kriterier och anvisningar för Utmårkelsen Svensk Kvalitet—ett verk-
tyg för verksamhetsutveckling’. Göteborg. eed
SIQ, 19964, ‘Arbetshafte för ståndiga förbåttringar”. Göteborg.
SIQ, 1996b, ‘Institutet för Kvalitetsutveckling’. Göteborg.
SIQ, 19965, ‘Vagvisare för vinnare’. Göteborg.

SIQ, 1996-7, ‘Kundorienterat. Nyhetsbrev från Institutet för Kvalitetsutveckling".
Göteborg.

SIS, 1994, "Framtid med kvalitet—en introduktion till verksamhetsstyrning med
ISO 9000 som modell”. Stockholm: SIS Kvalitetsforum, Utgåva 1, September.

SIS Forum AB, 1994-7, ‘Nytt om niotusen. Aktuell information om kvalitet och
ISO 9000". Göteborg.

SIS Forum AB, 1996, ‘Gér företaget starkare’. Göteborg.

SIS ForumCenter, 1996, 'Kvalitet framför allt—en introduktion till verk-
samhetsstyrning med ISO 9000 som modell”. Utgåva 2, November.

SIS KvalitetsForum, 1995, "Framtid med Kvalitet 9000—en introduktion till verk-
samhetsstyrning med ISO 9000 som modell. 2:a upplagan’. Stockholm.

SJÖSTEDT, G., 1973, OECD-samarbetet: Funktioner och effekter. Stockholm: SU,
Statsvetenskapliga institutionen, Stockholm Political Studies No. 3.

SMITH, G. E., MaLINOwskKI, B., SPINDEN, H., and GOLDENWEISER, Å., 1927,
Culture. The Diffusion Controversy. New York: W. W. Norton.

SOU 1997:57. I medborgarnas tjånst. En forvaltningspolitik för staten. Betånkande av
Förvaltningspolitiska kommissionen.

SS—EN 45020, 1999, Allmånna termer och rekommendationer avseende standardisering
och dårmed sammanhångande områden (ISO/IEC Guide 2: 1996). Utgåva 2: SIS.
SS-ISO 9004-2, Kvalitetssystem—Del 2: Allminna riktlinjer för tjånster. Stockholm: SIS.

STRANG, D., and Meyer, J. W., 1993, ‘Institutional Conditions for Diffusion’,
Theory and Society, Vol. 22, pp. 487-511.

STREECK, W., 1996, ‘Neo-Voluntarism: A New European Social Policy Regime?’,

in Marks, G. et al., Governance in the European Union. London: Sage.

STUURMAN, C., 1995, ‘Technical Standards and the
Amsterdam: Vrije Universiteit.

SVENSSON, A., 1993. Malstyrning i praktiken. Stockholm: Liber.
and PIHLGREN, G., 1989, Målstyrning: 90-talets ledningsform för offentlig verk-

Law’, Doctoral thesis.

samhet. Stockholm: Liber.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 183

TAMM HALLSTRÖM, K., 19964, ‘Den Vaxande standa
[SO 9000-standarder’. Score (thesis research proposal).

_— 1996b, “The Production of Management Standards’, Revue d’ Economie
Industrielle, No. 75, 1st Quarter, pp. 61-76.

TARSCHYS, D., 1988, ‘Den kluvna manniskan’
I vålståndets råvsax. Stockholm: SNS.

THOMAS, Å., 1989, ‘One-Minute Management Education: A Sign of the Times’,
Management Education and Development, Vol. 20. pp. 23-38.

THOMAS, G., Meyer, J., Ramrez, J. W., and Borr, J., 1987, Institutional Structure:
Constituting State, Society and the Individual. Beverly Hills Sage.
THOMPSON, J., 1967, Organizations in Action. New York: McGraw-Hill.

TOULMIN, S., 1990, Cosmopolis. The Hidden Agenda of Modemity. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

WALGENBACH, P., 1997, ‘Between “Show Business and Galley”—On the Use of

the ISO 9000 Standards in Companies’, Paper presented at a
SCANCOR/SCORE seminar on standardizing, Arild, 18-20 September.

WALLANDER, J., 1994, Budgeten—ett onddigt ont. Stockholm: SNS Förlag.

WEBER, M., 1964, The Theory of Social and Economic Organization. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Weick, K. E., 1976, ‘Educational Organizations as Loosely Coupled Systems’,
Administrative Science Quarterly. Vol. 21, pp 1-19.

WestTNEY, D. E., 1987, Imitation and Innovation: The Transfer of Western

Organizational Patterns to Meiji Japan. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
VON WRIGHT, G., 1993, Myten om framsteget. Stockholm: Bonniers.

rdiseringen—framvåxten av

, In Tarschys, D., and Håge, I. (eds.),


Index

abstract systems 40-1

actors:
identity 131-3, 144-5
independence 134
standardization and 133—4
types of 131

administrative field:
market solutions 33
standards and 3, 4

adopters, see following standards
arenas, as standardizers 100—13

budgeting 165-6

centralization 143—4
communication, standards and 16
cooperation, standards and 11
coordination:

control and 21

EU and 33

markets and 21

organizations and 21

standards and 11, 16, 21, 28
corporations, standards and 9
customer:

concept of 74

public services and 118-19

decentralization 45
delegation 45
deregulation 32
diffusion 139—40
directives:
appealing against 46
control and 33
definition 12
experts and 42
fashion trends and 156
individuals and 37
standards and 29, 33, 46, 47
uniformity 142

epistemic communities 48-9
etiquette 14
EU (European Union):
Commisson 47
control 33
coordination 33
directives 47
national laws and 60
non-members 64

rule-making delegated 3

standardizing organizations 47

standards 3, 29, 30, 32, 45, 47, 133, 148-9,
170, 171

strengthening members 37

experts:

directives and 42

global scale 38

identity of 8

ISO and 87

legitimacy 48

standardization and 40-9

TC 176 and 93-4

types of 43

fashion trends 151—68

fashions:
definition 152
in standards 154

following standards:
ambiguity and 129-30
certification 130
expertise and 136
implementation 146-7
incentives 134, 135-7
practice, changing 127-30, 136
presentation, changing 128—9, 130
reasons for 6, 130—4
reporting on 128
situation and 133
third parties 128, 134, 169

global markets 7
globalization:

international standard-based organizations and
67

manifestation of 37

mental 37-8

normative communities 39
public sector and 104

standards and 7, 9, 31, 38, 39, 67

human relations movement 82
human resource management 82

imitation 141-2, 156
individualization 36—7
innovation 15, 140—1, 156, 158, 164
institutions 8, 22—8
ISO 9000:

academic influence 78-80, 83—4

——— En


em oo ——— -C ——

186 INDEX

ISO 9000 (cont.):
certification 116, 130, 146, 169
customer needs 75, 76
description 71-5
interpretation of 75-8
organization, assumptions about 75-8
popular management culture and 80-3
presentation and practice 146
public sector and 117, 119-20
quality 72-8
variations 88-9, 93

Joint stock companies 32, 156

knowledge:

neutrality and 47
storing 41, 42, 43, 44

laws:
fashion trends 156
optional 3
social norms and 14

standards and 3

management by objectives 14, 81, 116, 123
markets:
complaints 25—6
control and 31
coordination and 21
global 37
individuals and 36
legislation and 26
legitimacy 23
organizations and 22-8
responsibility 24—5
science and 26

standards and 7, 22-8, 30, 31, 33-4, 47, 148

nation-states:
experts and 48-9
standards and 32, 132
‘New Public Management’ 102
normative communities 28-9, 30, 31, 34—5, 36,
38
norms:
coordination and 28
definition 12
fashion trends and 156
professions and 35
standards and 30
uniformity and 142

OECD 3, 100, 103, 104
organizational fields 8, 52, 57-8
organizational forms:

cropping-up model 158-66, 168

definition 158-9

discourse 161-3, 166-7, 168

dissemination of 165-6

new 159-61
reforms 159-61, 162, 163, 164

organizations:
academics and 79
administrative systems 34
complexity of 79
coordination and 21
cropping-up model 158-63
directives from outside 37
expert knowledge and 42-3, 48
fashion trends and 155-8
identity 131
ISO 9000 and 75-8
leadership 12, 13
legislation and 26
legitimacy 23, 24
managers 81, 82, 84
markets and 22-8
organizations of 13
principles of 93-6
reforms 159-61, 162, 163, 164
responsibility 24, 27
rules and 7-8, 12

science and 26—/
standards and 22-8, 29-30, 31-3, 37, 50-68

politicians:
experts and 49
responsibility and 48
standards and 117, 118
popular management culture 80-3
POSDCORB 81, 82
professions:
experts and 44
globalization 38
knowledge and 42
standards and 34-5, 44
public opinion 6, 134, 157
public sector:
as businesses 119-20, 132
customers and 118-19, 121, 140
globalization and 104
ISO 9000 and 117
markets and 105
as Organizations 118-19
quality and 119

standards and 117-18, 119, 124
PUMA 100-14

quality:
assurance 72, 74-5
audit 78
awards 114
definition 73—4
improving 72
management 72, 76, 77-8
product 73


«vstens 73.77

quality standards:
development of 85
‘nternational trend 114
public sector and 117—18

regulation:
definition 10
standards and 1, 10-16

rules:
acceptance of 12

directives and 14

expert knowledge and 41-3
importance of 11-12
intelligence and 11

necessity for 11

norms and 14

organizations and 12

standards and 1, 4, 10, 13

science, expert knowledge and 42
scientific management 80-1
standard-based organizations:
creation of 52, 54-8
definition 50, 51
examples of 53-4
globalized world and 66-8
interaction between 56-7
international 66-8
legislation and 57
non-members 64
recruiting members 59-60
rules modification 64-5
self-regulation and 57
status and 55-6, 62, 65, 67
standardization:
conflict and 44
definition 15
expert knowledge and 40-9
fashion trends and 151-68
hypocrisy and 145, 146
perspectives on 7-10
principle and practice 27-8
problems 30-1

process of 85-99
Standardization in Sweden (SIS) 74, 116, 119,

121..124,123

standardizers:
academic researchers 3
governmental 3
money-making and 6
private 2, 38
scientists 3
trusting 171-2
uniformity and 149-50
standards:
abstract nature 146, 162
academic disciplines 43, 123

INDEX

187

administrative 35, 36, 130. 136
advantages 16, 169-71 på
ambiguity 129-30

arguments for 118-24
authority centres and 48
certification 5, 146, 150
change and 153-4

competing 147-8

complaints 25, 47

complex 13-14

compliance monitoring 63

control and 1, 21, 33

controversial 15-16, 36, 163

definition 4, 14, 15, 150

demand factors 35-6, 153, 154

directives and 29, 33, 46, 47

disadvantages 16, 171-2

dissemination of 60-2

diversity and 148-9, 157, 170

expert knowledge and 40, 41, 44, 47

fashion trends 151—68

fashions among 154

global order and 1, 37-8

individualization 36-7

information about 143

involuntary 28, 33, 134—5

knowledge base 71-84

legislation and 26

legitimacy 23, 24, 48

markets and 22-8, 30, 31, 33—4, 47, 172

normative communities and 30, 31, 34—5

organizations and 22-8, 29-30, 31-3, 37,
50-68

reforms and 166-8

regulation and 1, 10-16, 172

responsibility and 24-5, 28, 46-8, 49, 136

rules and 1, 4, 10, 13

science and 26-7, 43-4, 49

selling 36, 114-24

simplification 170

society and 10

supply factors 35—6, 153, 154

technical expert knowledge and 44-6

types of 4-5, 6-7

uniformity and 14, 138-50, 154, 157, 170,
171

variations of 88-9
voluntary 2, 9, 46, 134-5

standards organizations, national 31, 45—6

technical knowledge 44—6
technological development 9, 79

uniformity:

change and 157
competing standards and 147-8

directives and 142
imitation and 141-2


ISS

uniforniuty (cont)

innovation and 140—1. 158, 164
interpretation and 145

norms and 14?

processes creating | 38—42, 164—5

INDEX

Spac'
erandards and 14, |

time 151, 155

: )
world State 32

151. 153, 154,

}

)

0

155

1

154


‘In this insightful book, Brunsson, Jacobsson and associates propose that
standardization provides a viable alternative to market forces and to organizational -
forms as an institutional arrangement for coordinating and controlling complex
exchanges. Their arguments illuminate important facets of current developments
in our rapidly globalizing world:

W. Richard Scott, Professor Emeritus of Sociology, Stanford University

‘The authors do a masterful job of highlighting why the study of standardization
merits research attention ... this is a valuable book that will guide many future
empirical studies. American Journal of Sociology

In the modern world there is no shortage of people who know what is best for

others. Self-appointed experts, consultants, and organizations try to convince states,
corporations, and individuals that they would be better off if they only followed _-
some specific rules about what to do. These rules are presented as being voluntary |

and advisory. They are standards, not mandatory directives, and in modern life
Standards abound.

Standards may concern what characteristics a telephone should have, how a
company should report its financial transactions, how organizations should be |
managed, how states should treat their citizens, how children should be raised, and
so forth. Even organizations as powerful as states and large corporations follow
standards on how to organize, which policies to pursue, what kinds of services

to provide, or how their products should be designed.

t
Standards enable a higher degree of global order in the modern world than would
exist without them. They facilitate coordination and cooperation even among people
and organizations that are far apart. The authors believe that standardization is a
much neglected area of social science—an area that has by no means received the
attention it deserves in view of its importance to society. This book seeks to redress

the balance by providing an in-depth examination of a number of aspects of stan-
dardization, how it is formed, and what effects it has on the world in which we live.

Nils Brunsson is Professor of Management at the Stockholm School of Economics
and Chairman of the Stockholm Centre for Organizational Research (Score).

Bengt Jacobsson is Professor of Management at Södertörn University College.

He has previously worked at Lund University and the Stockholm Centre for
Organizational Research (Score).

ISBN 0-19-925695-0
OD FORD Syddansk Universitetsbibliotek

UNIVERSITY PRESS

| |
|
www.oup.com |

550201119898

TVER TS FT" ET PER pip hr me Gi dg * VO

=--

